Introduction

Climate and Empire

In 1869, at the age of thirty, Julius Hann seemed poised for a brilliant academic career. Holding two degrees in physics from the University of Vienna,
Hann had earned an international reputation three years earlier by explaining
the cause of a mysterious wind. Foehn blows warm and dry on the northern side of the Alps, resembling what those living east of the Rockies call
chinook. In the Alps it strikes most often in the cold months, producing incongruously warm temperatures and allegedly unleashing a variety of human
woes, from heart conditions to epileptic seizures. In Hann’s day, because of
foehn’s warmth and dryness, it was assumed to originate in the Sahara. Indeed, it was common at the time to ascribe the health effects of a local climate
to the prevailing air current, which in turn was understood to be determined
by its place of origin. By contrast, Hann’s “On the Origin of Föhn” of 1866
zoomed in to explain foehn as a local effect. Through years of hiking in the
Alps, notebook in hand, he had tracked the movements of clouds and deduced
the patterns of wind. At university, he had learned the new science of thermodynamics, the physics of heat and motion. This gave him the tools he needed
to interpret foehn in terms of the transformations undergone by a parcel of
air as it crosses the mountains, losing moisture as it rises and warming as it
descends the northern side. The resulting wind will feel hot and dry — not because it arrives from an African desert, but because of the physical properties
of the atmosphere and the relationship between heat and motion.1
This was a foundational moment in the history of an international research
program that I will refer to as dynamic climatology: the application of the physics of heat and fluid motion to explain climatic conditions in their past and

2

Introduction

present distribution across the surface of the earth. Dynamic climatology deserves a prominent place in the history of the Anthropocene, for it identified
and began to address the problem of conceptualizing interactions across scales
of space and time, from the human to the planetary.2
Dynamic climatology flourished in Austria for as long as the Habsburgs
ruled in Vienna. It was, as we will see, a science geared to the needs of this
multifarious empire, just then in the throes of modernization, and Hann stood
to be rewarded handsomely for his service to the state. He was on his way to
acquiring the authority of an imperial-royal (kaiserlich-königlich, k.k.)3 scientist, that is, an expert on the territory of the Habsburg Monarchy as a whole—
which covered nearly seven hundred thousand square kilometers of central,
eastern, and southern Europe in the nineteenth century, an area nearly twice
as large as the state of Germany today. Already he had begun to synthesize data
from across the imperial lands, forging a continental-scale window onto the
workings of the atmosphere.
Why then was Hann plagued by self-doubts as he entered the summer of
his thirty-first year? As his personal diary reveals, he felt his future in Vienna
to be “uncertain.” He was tormented by homesickness for the very mountains
that had set him on his path to success, longing for the “peace” and “mercy” of
their forests, “as in the days of youth.”4 He hovered on the verge of renouncing
his scientific career and returning to the seclusion of the monastery where he
had been educated.
To be modern, in the words of the geographer Yi-Fu Tuan, is to experience
the conflicting pulls of “cosmos” and “hearth”: the yearning to venture beyond known frontiers and the craving for the stability of the familiar.5 Climate
in Motion explores the consequences of this tension for the production of climatology as a global science in the nineteenth century. It argues that essential
elements of the modern understanding of climate arose as a means of thinking
across scales of space and time, in a state— the multinational Habsburg Monarchy, a bricolage of medieval kingdoms and modern laws— where such thinking
was a political imperative.
Until the twentieth century, theories of the global circulation of the atmosphere ignored motions smaller and shorter-lived than a major tropical cyclone.
The circle of scientists around Hann bridged that gap, developing a picture of
the interaction of small scale and large that still underwrites the climate models
of today. Arguably, what makes modern climate science modern is its integration
of phenomena of radically different dimensions. This requires methods appropriate to each scale; satellites are ideal for tracking hurricanes, for instance, but
of little use for following the minute fluctuations in temperature and humidity

Climate and Empire 3

that matter to the growth of a seedling. What’s more, atmospheric phenomena
at different scales do not proceed independently of each other. The breeze
that, out of nowhere, ruffles the pages of your book may be an indirect effect
of a storm brewing off the coast. As the sun’s energy warms air at the equator
and causes it to rise, it drives a hemispheric churning motion, which in turn
generates smaller eddies, from which even smaller whirls spin off. These crossscale exchanges of energy and even matter are what make global warming so allencompassing and so hard to predict. One of the greatest challenges scientists
face today is to model the very small-scale process by which water condenses
around an atmospheric particle and begins to form a cloud, in relation to the
very large-scale effects that clouds have on the global radiative energy balance.
In order to predict, say, the earth’s average temperature a century from now, scientists cannot ignore processes that unfold far more quickly and on far smaller
scales, such as cloud formation. They deal with this problem by means of what
they call “scale analysis,” meaning that they estimate which are the significant
phenomena for the purposes at hand and work with those to produce a reasonable approximation. The history of dynamic climatology is the story of this
multiscalar, multicausal way of engaging with the world.6
When I began the research for this book in 2001, the field of climate science
looked rather different than it does today, in 2017. The questions being put to
climate models were almost exclusively about the global impacts of increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases. The spatial and temporal resolution
of most models was too low to generate predictions that could be of use to
communities planning for the medium term; nor did most models factor in
regional-scale forcing mechanisms. Only recently has the question of regional
impacts gained the attention of a significant portion of the modeling community.7 Meanwhile, stalemates over international agreements on climate change
have confirmed the need for action at the local and regional levels— and thus
for reliable predictions at these spatial scales. Back in the early 2000s, one of
the few research groups modeling regional impacts was CLEAR, or Climate
and Environment in the Alpine Region. This group emphasized the value of
alternating between local and global perspectives, or downscaling.8 Based in
Switzerland, they pointed to the Alps as a region that exemplified the benefits
of small-scale climate analysis alongside global modeling. Prescient as their
program may have been for the twentieth century, it struck me as an echo of
the lessons of Habsburg climatology.
Working without the aid of digital computers, Habsburg scientists invented
creative ways to detect, model, and represent atmospheric motions. These
included turning plants into measuring instruments, imagining riverbeds as

4

Introduction

models of atmospheric waves, and inventing new literary and cartographic
genres. Although you may not have heard their names before, their ingenuity
was widely celebrated in their own day. Hann was nominated for a Nobel
Prize in 1910, and his publications were said by an American colleague to
tower “over other books as the pyramids of Gizeh tower over the valley of the
Nile.”9 Others have observed that the research of Hann and his colleagues
was “eclectic”: whereas most climate scientists today specialize in research at
a single scale, “the range of phenomena considered [by Austrian scientists]
spanned the space-time scales from the global circulation to boundary layer
turbulence,”10 from the planetary scale to the dimensions of agriculture and
human health. Indeed, these scientists produced a novel conceptual apparatus
for tracking the transfer of energy from hemispheric flows down to molecular
motions. What’s more, they found creative ways to make their insights vivid
to a nonscientific audience. This new way of thinking about local winds in
relation to a hemispheric circulation in turn breathed life into the Habsburg
idea of transnational interdependence.

environment and Empire
A twenty-first-century reader might be surprised to open the first volume of
the Journal for Austrian Ethnography (1895) and find an article titled “The
Importance of Collecting Popular Names for Plants.”11 What did the study
of human cultures have to do with botany? How was the emergence of human science in this multiethnic state tied to the study of the nonhuman environment?
Over the past two decades, historians have demonstrated the many ways in
which the making of environmental knowledge in the long nineteenth century
was inextricably bound to European empire-building. This is true, first, in
the sense that imperial expansion transformed colonial environments in farreaching and irreversible ways. Environmental historians have shown how empires depleted natural resources, disrupted ecosystems, and introduced invasive species, often leading to the extinction of native ones. Europeans justified
their empires by pointing to their superiority as “masters of nature.” But such
mastery counted both humans and nonhumans among their victims. In some
cases, the nonhuman environment has avenged itself against the imposition of
control by means of epidemics, floods, earthquakes, and other catastrophes.12
In other cases, empires eventually instituted policies of conservation, and yet
these have often come at the expense of indigenous rights. This is the tragic
side of the relationship between environment and empire.13

Climate and Empire 5

At the same time, the environmental history of modern empires is also a
history of learning. This is not to argue, as George Basalla did in the 1960s,
that the explosion of natural historical knowledge that began in the sixteenth
century was the achievement of intrepid European naturalists penetrating the
wilds of other continents.14 Nor is it to forget that some intellectual traditions
were unlearned, even forcibly suppressed, as a result of colonization. Rather,
over the past two decades, historians have shown precisely how the celebrated
discoveries of metropolitan elites rested on knowledge appropriated from colonial naturalists and native informers.15 The knowledge produced in this way
included strains that we would now call ecological: in particular, knowledge
of the distribution of plants and animals in relation to conditions of climate
and soil. Indeed, the classification of new species has surged along the edges
of expanding empires, even if closely followed by the disappearance of those
newly cataloged species.16 In other words, there is an uncomfortably intimate
relationship between the growth of environmental knowledge and the environmental destruction wrought by imperialism.
What’s more, some of the modern era’s most damning critiques of imperialism and its ecological costs have come from scientists in the service of
empires, from Johann Forster in the eighteenth century to Arthur Tansley in
the twentieth. Twenty years ago, Richard Grove argued that the origins of
modern environmentalism lie in the responses of colonial naturalists to the environmental degradation they witnessed on Pacific islands and for which they
knew Europeans to be responsible. More recently, Helen Tilley has shown
how twentieth-century scientists working for the British Empire in Africa developed their own environmentalist ideas by contrasting European land-use
practices with the sustainable methods of local agriculture.17 In some cases,
imperial science proved sufficiently independent of imperial ideology to generate genuinely new knowledge. No less significant for the history of environmental science and politics was the scale of empire in the nineteenth century.
Its networks of information exchange laid the basis for the global science of
the late twentieth century and have been linked suggestively to the emergence
of a “planetary consciousness.”18 From this angle, empires have been experimental sites for exploring ties of interdependence among far-flung humans,
nonhumans, and the inorganic world.19

D e f i n i n g C l i m at e
This book inquires into the role of nineteenth-century empires in producing
knowledge specifically about climate. In the nineteenth and early twentieth

6

Introduction

centuries, the meaning of climate in European languages was in flux. Since
ancient times, climate had signified the latitude-dependent effect of solar radiation, klima being the Greek word for inclination or the angle of incidence
of sunlight. Three climate zones neatly banded each hemisphere: frigid at
the poles, temperate at midlatitudes, and torrid at the equator. By the nineteenth century, however, geographic explorers and medical and agricultural
researchers were drawing attention to the complex spatial variability of atmospheric conditions. Thus late nineteenth-century scientists contrasted the
“solar climate,” meaning the distribution of heat to be expected on the basis
of solar radiation and the known composition of the earth’s atmosphere, with
the “physical” or “terrestrial climate,” meaning climate as modified by any
number of factors, such as the shape of the earth’s surface and the distribution of land, water, and vegetation. This terminological confusion reflected
a methodological problem of scale. Scientists of the nineteenth century possessed rudimentary physical models of the planetary circulation of the atmosphere, but they had no way to integrate these models with accumulating
evidence of the fine-grained variability of climate across the surface of the
earth. As one medical writer in the Silesian spa town of Kudowa expressed
the difficulty in 1908, “Even if this locally restricted meaning of climate is not
common usage, the phrase ‘weather or atmospheric conditions’ [Wetter oder
Witterung] wouldn’t always be accurate in what follows, and I must apologize
in advance for the lack of an appropriate expression.”20 Thus climate was a
fundamentally ambiguous concept in the nineteenth century, in ways that have
escaped the attention of historians.
The temporal dimensions of climate were just as ambiguous as its spatial
extent. The relevant time scales ranged from the seasonal, in the case of medical and agricultural climatology, to the geological, in the case of theories of
the Ice Ages. Indeed, these temporal perspectives were proving impossible
to reconcile. How could the evidence unearthed in the 1830s and 1840s of an
ancient Ice Age be squared with the apparent stability of the earth’s climate
since the start of human records?21 If climate implies a time-averaged state, it
was not clear how long an interval was appropriate to its definition.
Finally, the meanings of climate also varied in their proximity to human
interests. Alexander von Humboldt had famously defined climate as all the
changes in the atmosphere that perceptibly affect our sense organs.22 This
anthropocentric definition reflected the fact that climate was recognized as an
influence on almost every aspect of human life: health, agriculture, labor, trade,
even the psyche. Indeed, the historical roots of climate science lie largely in
practical efforts to improve everyday life. Much of our knowledge of climate

Climate and Empire 7

has come from everyday experience with the many aspects of nature that stand
in mutual dependence with the atmosphere, such as vegetation, water supply,
and soil conditions. As historians have noted, professional scientists often built
on the traditional knowledge of those whose livelihoods depended on climatic
knowledge, such as farmers, sailors, and fishermen.23 At the same time, climatological knowledge was being produced by new kinds of experts of many
stripes, including botanists, foresters, agricultural scientists, geologists, paleontologists, mining officials, medical geographers, pharmacists, and balneologists. Nineteenth-century botanists, for instance, referred to vegetation as an
ideal climatic record, “everywhere a reflection of the local climate,” while geologists recognized glaciers as the best possible “climatic measuring instruments” (Klimamesser).24 Just as numerous were the institutions that produced
knowledge relevant to climatology. At European universities, climatology might
be studied and taught in any or all of three different faculties: geography, physics, and medicine. Climate knowledge was also produced far beyond the walls
of universities: at public observatories, by academies of forestry or agriculture,
by voluntary associations like Austria’s popular Meteorological Society, and by
European explorers and travelers the world over.25 Thus the study of climate
mattered in practical ways to people of all kinds. At the same time, scientists
were increasingly interested in atmospheric phenomena unfolding in the upper layers of the atmosphere. These were accessible only to intrepid mountaineers and balloonists— and they bore no obvious relation to human life.26
When did people begin to speak of “climate” in the singular, in the sense
of a property of the earth as a whole? As we will see in chapters 7 and 9, the
concept of the global climate entered popular discourse in central Europe in
the 1870s, in the midst of a heated debate over anthropogenic climate change.
But that is only half the story. Just as important was the rigorous definition of
a “local climate” that entered with it. A modern, multiscalar concept of climate
was born from encounters between scientists and others with wide-ranging
claims to climate expertise.

Varieties of Empire
European empires of the nineteenth century seized on climatology as a tool
for adapting newly acquired colonial environments to imperial ends. Climate
was studied in relation to a swiftly changing global distribution of production
and trade, as well as shifting theaters of military conflict. It was with the aid of
such research that the global spread of capitalism was understood at the time
to “make the best of the diverse endowments of the world by encouraging

8

Introduction

the most efficient use of each country’s particular resources.”27 Eighteenthcentury savants had typically regarded the fit between a society and its natural
environment as the result of a divine plan.28 Nineteenth-century geographers
saw it instead as the result of a process of biological and cultural adaptation,
one in which imperialists intended to intervene. Theories of acclimatization
supported imperial plans to settle Europeans permanently in the “torrid
zone.”29 In principle, if not always in practice, climatology could inform decisions about where to locate agricultural settlements and colonial towns. It
also inspired the construction of high-altitude medical rehabilitation centers
for sick and weary colonists in the tropics, taking advantage of cooler, drier
mountain air.30
One historian has characterized nineteenth-century climatology as a “sleepy
backwater,”31 a charge that held true in certain parts of the world. In many
parts of Europe’s overseas empires, climatology developed as a scattershot
study of local climates, paired with the self-serving theory that “the tropics,”
whatever they were, were unsuitable for European labor.32 Across Europe and
North America in the mid-nineteenth century, governments and private societies organized networks of meteorological observers. But this data was mined
primarily for the purposes of storm forecasting. As the Habsburg climatologist
Alexander Supan explained in 1881, “Climate has retreated with the advance
of weather.”33 In 1908 Napier Shaw complained of the “waste” of the British
Meteorological Office, from which he had recently retired as director. Data
was streaming in, but to what end? Shaw lamented as well the discontinuities
of the imperial network— “four observatories and over four hundred stations
of one sort or another in the British Isles; an elaborate installation of windmeasuring apparatus at Holy head; besides other ventures squandered abroad;
an anemometer at Gibraltar, another at Saint Helena; a sunshine recorder at
the Falkland Isles, half a dozen sets of instruments in British New Guinea, and
a couple of hundred on the wide sea.”34 “Waste” in this sense was a function
of the inability or unwillingness of scientists of overseas empires to mediate
between local observations and global models.35
Indeed, histories of science and empire tend to assume a divergence of
interests and epistemic commitments between imperial scientists and local
collectors. Imperial scientists figure in this scholarship as intellectual “lumpers,” proponents of generalization, against the “splitters” who would insist on
nature’s local variability. Imperial science in this sense was embodied by the
London botanist Joseph Hooker, the director of the imperial botanical garden
at Kew, who claimed that his colonial correspondents paid too much attention
“to minute differences that when long dwelt upon . . . assume minute value.”36

Climate and Empire 9

According to this account, the global perspective of modern science emerged
at the expense of the local.
However, historians have paid far less attention to the geography of knowledge production in the continental empires of nineteenth-century Eurasia:
Habsburg, Romanov, Ottoman, and Qing. In these cases the dividing line between metropolitan and provincial knowledge was far less clear. These states
had in common the capacity to govern multiple cultures and to wield power
from multiple centers. They took up the tools of modern science in part in the
interest of developing new imperial “languages of self-description” that could
serve as alternatives to the simplifications of nationalism. Undermining reified categories of nation and race, these sciences traced histories of migration,
mixing, and cultural transfer. In other words, these late imperial sciences established the hybridity of their populations and territories as empirical facts.37
As this suggests, modern states do not all render society “legible” in the
same way.38 Making a territory and its population legible need not mean abstracting away local particularities. “Seeing like a state” might instead mean
bringing imperial diversity into sharper focus. Historians of cartography recognize that maps do not simply reflect the world; they actively contribute to
the creation of a territory by visualizing its features selectively, thereby encouraging some modes of interaction with the environment and discouraging
others. In this way, maps that accentuate heterogeneity may help to preserve
local differences of environment and culture.39
In the Habsburg Monarchy, in particular, “local knowledge” in fields like
ethnography, medicine, and physical geography was often produced as “imperial science” and funded by the imperial state. Recent research by Pieter Judson and others has shown how the nineteenth-century Habsburg state created
a legal space in which even former serfs could assert their rights as citizens and
pursue economic development. Far from inhibiting modernization, the state’s
decentralized structure allowed grassroots politics and cultural pluralism to
flourish.40 Already in 1817, the Habsburg archduke Johann, a great patron of
natural history, articulated the principle that provincial patriotism could go
hand in hand with loyalty to the dynasty: “Austria’s strength rests on the diversity of its provinces . . . which one should carefully preserve. . . . Austria
has recovered her strength after every misfortune, because each province stood
on its own and considered its survival independently of the others, and yet
contributed loyally to the common goal.”41 Previous research hints at the implications of this ideology in fields like ethnography, medicine, and physical
geography. In these cases, research conducted in the service of nationalism—
perhaps even the “national schools of thought” celebrated by post-Habsburg

10

Introduction

historians— was sponsored by the ministry of education and articulated, often
in German, by Habsburg-loyal scholars as contributions to the ideology of
“unity in diversity.”42
So it was that the Austrian Society for Ethnography instructed its members
in the collection of botanical knowledge from peasants, women in particular.43
Knowing the popular names for plants in multiple dialects enabled the botanist and the ethnographer jointly to track the spatial distribution of a given species and the diffusion of a given dialect. Research in this vein was of particular
significance “in our multilingual Austria . . . since the popular names are not
only linguistic but also cultural-historical records.” As we will see in chapter
10, the discovery that in some cases the same name was being used for different plants would have profound repercussions for interpretations of the relationship between climate and living things. By the same token, ethnographers
took it upon themselves to record names for characteristic local winds and the
rituals associated with them. Thus Hann was familiar with the adage of Alpine
peasants: Steigt man im Winter um einen Stock, so wird es wärmer um einen
Rock (“If you climb in winter up a stair, one less coat you will need to wear”).44
To Hann, this meant that inversions of the usual decrease of temperature with
height must be a common phenomenon, which provided a clue to atmospheric
conditions of thermal equilibrium. In short, the fine-grained ethnic geography
patronized by the Habsburg state often involved tracking a given natural kind
across the Monarchy, in order to extract differences of language and culture.
By attaching value to natural diversity, such research promoted the integration
of “indigenous places” into “imperial space.”45

S e e i n g V a r i a b i l i t y i n N at u r e
Climatology in imperial Austria merits comparison to related enterprises in
other nineteenth-century imperial states. The royal-imperial Central Institute
for Meteorology and Geomagnetism (Zentralanstalt fur Meteorologie und
Geomagnetismus, later Geodynamik; ZAMG) was founded in Vienna in 1851,
four years after the opening of the Royal Prussian Meteorological Institute.
The British Meteorological Office evolved out of a committee established in
1854, while the French meteorological service was founded in 1855 and the US
Weather Service in 1870. Like these other meteorological offices, the ZAMG
was charged with taking advantage of the new technology of telegraphy in
order to issue advance warnings of approaching storms. Indeed, Austrian
scientists played an active role in the development of an international stormwarning system in the 1860s, including hosting the first-ever International

Climate and Empire 11

Meteorological Congress in 1873, where the conventions of meteorological
telegraphy were negotiated. And yet issuing forecasts was work that most
ZAMG scientists disdained. Kreil, its first director, was distressed to find that
not only was he expected to predict the weather, he was even held responsible for it— in certain circles he became known as the “weather maker.” Given
the state of meteorological knowledge at the time, Kreil believed that reliable
weather forecasting was a long way off. For now, as he tried to convince the
public in his popular writings, the most useful knowledge would not seek to
“organize agriculture according to the daily fluctuations of the atmospheric
conditions, but once and for all according to the average climatic character of
specific places and regions.”46 Kreil and his associates genuinely believed that
their research would benefit the state. But those benefits would come from
knowledge of long-term regularities, not short-term predictions. They would
come, in other words, from climatology, with its practical value for agriculture,
medicine, tourism, trade, and military operations.
Austria seems to have been unusual in this respect, as far as one can tell from
the sparse historical literature on nineteenth-century atmospheric science. At
the state-sponsored observatories of Berlin, London, Paris, and Washington,
DC, it seems that climatological research tended to be viewed as little more
than a quaint relic of the eighteenth century, a worthy pastime for provincial
amateurs or peasant farmers but of little relevance to modern science. Only in
rare cases did meteorological officers in North America and western Europe
choose to invest in the study of climate— that is, to shift their priority from
short-term forecasts to long-term planning.47
Climatology thrived in particular in the great land empires of Eurasia: Russia, India, and Austria. Presented with an expansive and continuous field for
geoscientific research, scientists in these states began to think in new ways.
Tasked with the goal of stably and efficiently exploiting the territory’s resources, they set out to map its “natural regions” and “transition zones.” One
historian of imperial Russia has aptly described this enterprise as a scientific
project of “regionalization.” The regionalizing sciences of the nineteenth century were holistic enterprises intent on analyzing local differences within a
larger, integrated context.48 The baseline definition of these regions was climatic: average temperatures and rainfall were the fundamental data on which
a mental map of imperial difference was being constructed. Scientists thus
came to appreciate the heterogeneity of climates and to seek the causes of their
differentiation.
The choice to emphasize or de-emphasize the diversity of an empire’s human
and nonhuman subjects— the choice between pursuing imperial climatology

12

Introduction

as a coherent overview or as a patchwork of local details— was always a strategic political decision. From the perspective of Henry Francis Blanford, chief
of the Indian Meteorology Department (founded 1875), the subcontinent furnished an ideal site for climatological research: a single, contained landmass
displaying in miniature nearly all the variations in climate to be found on the
earth’s surface, with an unobstructed view of the formation of tropical storms.
To speak of “the climate of India” in the singular, he argued, “would be as
misleading as if we were to speak of its inhabitants in terms implying that
they are a homogeneous race, alike in ethnic and social characters, culture
and belief.”49 Yet others expressed India’s suitability for climatological study
in language with quite a different political valence. They emphasized the order
and regularity of the Indian climate (now in the singular) and the ease with
which British science could master it.50
In Russia, as Wladimir Köppen pointed out in 1895, climatology followed
the tsar’s troops, as the Russians pushed into the Crimea, the Caucasus, Siberia, and beyond. “Russia’s conquests to its west have quickly expanded our
knowledge. For the Russian soldier is followed with remarkable speed by the
Russian [scientific] observer, and out of the impenetrable dens of thieves . . .
have for a long time now been appearing practicable, uninterrupted meteorological data series.”51 The work of Russia’s foremost climatologist, Alexander
Voeikov (1842– 1916) reflected the ambitions of a modernizing and expanding
empire. He produced theories of the global climate system and of the influence of climate on social life, and he argued that unfavorable environments
could be improved through rational water use.52 Meanwhile, a more cautious
research program in soil science under Vasilii Dokuchaev was investigating
charges of human-induced climate change in the “black earth” region of the
Russian steppe.53 As Catherine Evtuhov shows, the “sheer bulk and diversity
of information” gathered by Dokuchaev “rendered it virtually unusable by
the central authorities.”54 Thus enterprising Russian scientists and citizens
were hard at work developing scientific methods of agricultural assessment
and improvement— methods in which the imperial government took little if
any interest at all.
The situation was different still in the United States. Lorin Blodget’s Climatology of the United States (1857) explicitly set out to counter the claim that
the nation’s climate was especially “variable or extreme.”55 East of the one hundredth meridian, Blodget insisted that the climate was “uniform”; and where
mountains intruded, they “do not shelter or expose either side, nor cause any
contrasts in the character of productions respecting them.” Significantly for
the present study, Blodget favorably compared his nation’s climatic uniformity

Climate and Empire 13

with “the abrupt transitions, and the predominance of local changes in southern and central Europe.”56 He concluded that whatever local variability the
climate might display was not worth scientific attention. Climatic uniformity,
not diversity, was his ideal. It is therefore unsurprising to learn that the federal
government dedicated few resources to the investigation of local climates.57

“ k . u n d k .” C l i m a t o l o g y
In Austria, too, climatology was closely tied to empire-building. From the
perspective of the Habsburg state, climatology was not about exploring a
dark continent but about reimagining a familiar one in the throes of change.
Over the course of seven centuries, through strategic marriages and battles,
the Habsburg dynasty had acquired a motley yet contiguous set of kingdoms,
duchies, and principalities. Extending through nine degrees of longitude, the
dynasty’s lands were crisscrossed by mountains: one chain running east from
the tall peaks of the Alps in the westernmost province of Vorarlberg, then
turning south along the Adriatic into the craggy towers of the Dinaric Alps;
another rising to the east from the Bohemian massif up into the Carpathians,
a largely unmapped range that isolated Galicia, the Habsburgs’ newest acquisition. Before the coming of the railways, the Monarchy was largely dependent on its main river way, the Danube, for transport. Its waters originated in
melting glaciers in the Alps, flowed east through Vienna, Bratislava (German:
Pressburg; Hungarian: Poszony), and Budapest (German: Ofen-Pest), into
lands still controlled by the Ottomans in the nineteenth century, and emptied
into the Black Sea. Across much of the Habsburg world— the grassy plains of
the Hungarian steppe; the rocky, porous ground along the Adriatic; and the
high-altitude pastures of the Alps and Carpathians— agriculture was possible
only during a brief season when adequate rainfall and mild temperatures prevailed. A swing of the climate could easily spell hunger. On the other hand,
excess rainfall could trigger devastating floods along the Danube and its tributaries, especially in deforested areas, as well as rockslides in the mountains.
In the marshy lands of the Carpathian basin, eighteenth-century attempts at
water regulation had wreaked havoc with the ecosystem and threatened floodplain agriculture. Transport and communication across the Habsburgs’ lands
was also highly dependent on climate. During Europe’s Little Ice Age, from
roughly the thirteenth through the early nineteenth centuries, portions of the
Danube often froze, and snow blocked certain mountain passes year round.
With the period of warming that set in circa 1860, baseline expectations from
the past were not necessarily useful guides to the future.58

14

Introduction

F i g u r e 1 . Karst Landscape in Kupreško polje (Bosnia-Herzegovina), by Zygmunt Ajdukiewicz, 1901. The “karst” lands of the Dinaric Alps were known for their sinkholes, caves,
and underground waterways.

The changes afoot in central Europe in the nineteenth century were socioeconomic as well as climatic. “For now a little rural village and its surroundings can
shut itself in with all that it has, all that it is, and all that it knows,” wrote the novelist
and naturalist Adalbert Stifter at midcentury. “Soon, however, this will no longer
be so, and [the village] will be caught up in the dealings of the world beyond it.”59
The nineteenth-century Habsburg Empire was a geographically extensive but
semiclosed economic system, having been excluded from the German Zollverein
in the 1830s. It was out of the race for overseas colonies and had minimal prospects for expansion in southeastern Europe. Within its borders, capitalism was
already beginning to produce its signature geography of unevenness. Between
the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the stock market crash of 1873, industrialization transformed the geography of production in the Habsburg lands. Regions
of the Monarchy that had once been economically self-sufficient were thrust
into the role of imperial “periphery,” generating a flood of migrants to the Monarchy’s new industrial centers. After the crash, capital investment shifted to the
periphery in order to take advantage of cheaper land, raw materials, and labor.60
In this context, the new genre of climatography (chapter 6) played in part
the role of advice manual for repurposing natural environments to fit the new

Climate and Empire 15

F i g u r e 2 . Angyalhaza puszta, eastern Hungary, 1891. Note the draw well in the background,
typical of the region.

economy. Possibilities included introducing new crops (beets for sugar, potatoes for spirits), launching a tourist industry, or building spas or sanatoriums
to provide “climatotherapy.” At the same time, imperial climatologists were
called on to adjudicate between proponents of development and those of conservation. Deforestation or swamp drainage was blamed for a deterioration
of the climate within the span of historical memory in several areas, above
all Bohemia, the Hungarian plains, and the karst regions of Carniola, Dalmatia, Croatia, and Bosnia.61 Everywhere it was argued that restoring forests
would create a moister, more fertile climate. Inquiries into suspected climatic
shifts in the course of human history were thus highly public and politically
fraught.
In all these ways, climatology’s history in Austria sheds light on this science’s close ties to nineteenth-century imperialism more generally. At the same
time, the scientific institutions of the supranational state formed a unique lens
onto the natural world. Unlike administrators in Washington or Saint Petersburg, the emperor’s ministers in Vienna saw good reasons, both practical and
ideological, to support the study of climate down to the details of the smallest
scales. And unlike British scientists, with their insistence on the fundamentally
orderly atmosphere of India, Habsburg climatologists were far more ready to
grapple with the true complexity of their data. As we will see, their day-to-day

16

Introduction

focus on minute fluctuations and statistical subtleties was the flip side of their
quest for an all-encompassing overview.
Julius Hann made this point most effectively. After admitting that he had
spent an entire week determining how best to standardize measurements of the
distribution of air pressure in central and southern Europe, he cited Francis
Bacon in his defense. Bacon had once remarked that the natural philosopher
who neglects details is like a haughty prince who ignores the petition of a
poor woman: “He who will not attend to things like these as being too paltry
and minute, can neither win the kingdom of heaven nor govern it.”62 The
Baconian metaphor of the “empire of nature” underscored the affinity of this
scientific precept with the logic of the multinational state. In fact, Francis I
(1804– 35) had been praised in nearly identical language for his comprehensive
knowledge of the Habsburg realm. The first ruler to call himself “Emperor
of Austria” and to envision the dynastic lands as a unified state, Francis was
known to occupy himself with what might seem to be insignificant local matters. Particularly on his frequent tours of the provinces, he was said to display
“his extensive, one could even say all-encompassing knowledge of the laws,
customs, and morals of all parts of his great kingdom. . . . A phrase that was
often on his lips was this: ‘There is no affair that a priori and according to
general principles could be called large or small; matters are only large or small
in comparison to and in relation to other things.’”63

T o wa r d a H i s t o r y o f S c a l i n g
The history of climate science needs to be seen, then, as part of a history of
scaling: the process of mediating between different systems of measurement,
formal and informal, designed to apply to different slices of the phenomenal
world, in order to arrive at a common standard of proportionality. In the natural and social sciences, scaling (upscaling, downscaling) refers to the process
of adapting models to apply at larger or smaller dimensions of space and time.
But scaling is also something we all do every day. It is how we think, for instance, about how one individual’s vote might influence a national election, or
whether buying a hybrid car might slow global warming. It can also be a way
of situating the known world in relation to times or places that are distant or
otherwise inaccessible to direct experience. Scaling makes it possible to weigh
the consequences of human actions at multiple removes and to coordinate
action at multiple levels of governance. It depends on causal factors that are
likewise of varying dimensions, from an individual’s imagination to translocal
infrastructures, institutions, and ideologies. A focus on scaling is timely for

Climate and Empire 17

the field of history today, at odds as it is over “going big.” Rather than framing
this as an either/or choice, we might think historically about what is involved
in working between and across different scales of observation, analysis, and
action.64
Scaling is a necessary step in the production of what John Tresch calls “cosmograms”: the representations we use to situate ourselves in relation to the
rest of the universe, to map our interconnections and mutual influences. The
history of scaling thus calls for a “materialized” intellectual history on Tresch’s
model. As he writes, “Cosmological ideas take on realist force when they are
anchored, housed, and transmitted in objects, technical networks, routine
practices, and social organizations.”65 Histories of scaling must therefore attend to the tools and practices of commensuration, which are not limited to
measuring instruments in the traditional sense. For instance, Benedict Anderson pointed out decades ago that the novel and the newspaper were key early
tools for creating a new scale of thought in the nineteenth century: the nation.66
More recently, Richard White has traced the role of the railroads in creating a
new, politicized space in nineteenth-century North America, for which transport rates provided the new metric of proximity and distance.67 When it comes
to climate change, some of the most important tools of scaling— for understanding the weather of the here and now in relation to large-scale, long-term
processes— have been found, not made. These include migratory animals, tree
rings, ice cores, fossils, rocks, and living plants.
In the nineteenth century, the scalar imagination was restless. A host of
technical developments— including the improvement of microscopes, telescopes, photography, telegraphy, and electrical clocks— allowed human observation to push down into the smallest dimensions of space and time, as well as
outward, across the earth, to the solar system, the galaxy, and beyond. Some
in the nineteenth century spoke of the annihilation of time and space. In fact,
time and space were measured more carefully than ever before. New intervals
of space and time were introduced: a tenth of a second, an electron-width,
a light-second, the height of the stratosphere, the depth of the earth’s crust.
Meanwhile, new political entities were emerging in an unprecedented variety
of sizes and forms. Circa 1850 may well have been a high point for the diversity
of state forms, after the upheavals of the Napoleonic Wars and before nationstates became ubiquitous.68 Thus the political imagination was not confined to
the spatial scale of nation-states and the temporal scale of their historical memory. In all, there was a wide variety of ways to envision relations between the
individual and the state, between nation and empire, between the small scale
and the large. Today, we have been so conditioned by statistical reasoning that

18

Introduction

we tend to view the micro solely as an instantiation of, or an exception to, the
macro. Alternatives proliferated in the nineteenth century, proposing relations
between micro and macro that were, for instance, emblematic, metonymic, or
ecological. In the Habsburg lands, as we will see in chapter 1, dynastic iconography maintained the vitality of Renaissance cosmologies.
Meanwhile, new modes of representation juxtaposed these radically disparate dimensions to dramatic effect. Part 2 of this book traces the emergence
in the nineteenth-century Habsburg lands of new techniques in a range of
media and disciplines— from landscape painting to geography, fiction, and atmospheric physics— all dedicated to representing precise local detail within a
large-scale overview. Elsewhere at the time, writers and artists were developing
related techniques. In the United States, for instance, the landscape paintings
of Frederic Church shifted away from Romanticism and toward what Jennifer
Raab calls an “aesthetic of information,” in which a proliferation of natural
details vies with and ultimately triumphs over any overall impression of unity.
This new orientation grew out of Church’s sense of the interdependence of
living things and culminated in his reinvention of himself as a landscape architect intent on revealing nature as a “living system.”69 Likewise, literary scholars
have shown how certain Victorian novels integrated their human stories into
grand visions of earth history. As Anna Henchman has recently put it, “Victorian writers move restlessly back and forth between self and universe, part and
whole.”70 These literary exercises in scaling were often responding directly
to developments in the sciences. “The novel,” write Jesse Oak Taylor, “helps
reconcile the expansive timescales of evolution, climate, and geological change
with those of human history and everyday life.”71 Thus the multiscalar vision
of nineteenth-century climatology arose interdependently with a host of new
ways of seeing and representing the human and natural world.
To be sure, some of these aesthetic trends proved more mystifying than
illuminating. Turning attention from human events to cosmic ones could be
a strategy for obfuscating the relationship between humans and nature back
on earth. In this vein, Victorian scientists liked to compare British industry’s
consumption of energy with the thermodynamic “dissipation” of energy on a
cosmic scale. In doing so, they made an unsustainable system of production
appear natural and inevitable.72 Hence the nineteenth century saw a growing
need for representational approaches that might discipline a scalar imagination run wild.
It was in this spirit that many in the Habsburg world undertook the work
of scaling. They insisted that nature could not be measured solely according
to a scale derived from human concerns; other measures of significance were

Climate and Empire 19

needed when studying nature on the very small scale or the very large. As the
physiologist and leader of the Czech national awakening J. E. Purkyne wrote
in the preface to the first issue of his scientific journal ziva: “We do not suppose that anyone will take exception to our discussing this or that seemingly
insignificant matter in greater detail and more meticulously; in infinite nature
nothing is insignificant, nor are the needs of man its only measure.”73 Likewise,
the geologist and liberal statesman Eduard Suess insisted that “the planet may
well be measured by man, but not according to man.” As he explained,
the standard for small and big as well as for the duration and the intensity of
a natural phenomenon is in many cases based on the physical organization of
man. . . . When we speak of a thousand years, we introduce the decimal system
and, with it, the structure of our extremities. We often measure mountains in
feet and we distinguish long and short periods of time according to the average length of human life and therefore based on the frailty of our bodies; and
we unconsciously borrow the standard for the expressions “intense” or “less
intense” from our personal experience.74

This theme was echoed by the pioneers of climatology in the Habsburg lands.
Karl Kreil, the founding director of the ZAMG in Vienna, insisted that “everywhere there is a macrocosm and a microcosm, a world on the large scale and
on the small— the latter just as important, often more important than the former.” He urged his colleagues to pursue the “interaction,” die Wechselwirkung,
between large-scale atmospheric phenomena and the “organic and inorganic
shell of the earth.”75 We might think of such comments as the self-defense of
Habsburg scientists against the accusation of drudgery that would haunt them
into our own day.
By distinguishing the multiple scales of climatic processes, and by devising
methods of observation and analysis appropriate to each, dynamic climatology
operationalized Suess’s principle that nature must be measured “by man but
not according to man.” His injunction to think across dimensions of space
and time rested on an implicit distinction between “lived” and “absolute”
scales of measurement. In this respect, dynamic climatology’s ambition of
studying the small scale in relation to the large resonates with quite a different tradition of central European thought: the philosophy of phenomenology,
as it was developed in the early twentieth century by Edmund Husserl, Jan
Patocka, and Ludwig Landgrebe, all born into the Habsburg Monarchy. These
philosophers contrasted the experience of the realm of “self-extension,” of
human “work,” with the experience of the “absolute” sphere of the earth, “the

20

Introduction

global context on which we depend.”76 It seems fitting, therefore, to describe
the history of Habsburg climatology as what Landgrebe called “a history of
the transformation of the horizons of the world.”77 From Husserl this book
also adopts the goal of restoring “the link between our knowledge in physics
and our intuitive experience of things in our ‘surrounding world of life.’”78 It
accepts phenomenology’s challenge to the historian of science to re-embed
inherited scientific knowledge in the existential context in which it originated.
Yet scaling is a more uncertain and imperfect process than the phenomenologists supposed. Not even the natural sciences have access, in practice, to
an “absolute” measurement scale. Every measurement depends on an agreedupon definition of a standard unit and its instantiation in an exemplary object.
These standards are social conventions and recent research has shown that behind many such conventions lurk hidden histories of contention.79 It is interesting to note that contemporary English offers no verb to denote the process
of negotiation that produces a measurement standard. The use of “commensurate” as a verb seems to have fallen by the wayside in the nineteenth century,
when the work of commensuration had apparently been completed once and
for all by boards of experts. The term “scaling” fills this linguistic gap and
so reminds us of the work that goes into mediating between different ways of
measuring the world. As we will see, such work is not only cognitive; it may
challenge the body, put social relationships to the test, and expose a mediator
to the pull of conflicting desires.

An Outline of the Book
Part 1, “Unity in Diversity,” analyzes the mutual development of imperial ideology and empire-wide institutions of environmental science. Its sources include state-institutional archives and distinctive compilations of knowledge
such as the encyclopedic Austro-Hungarian Monarchy in Word and Image,
also known as the Kronprinzenwerk. Chapter 1, “The Habsburgs and the
Collection of Nature,” takes a broad and deep view of the production of climatic knowledge in the dynasty’s lands. It reveals the motivations behind the
long-term collection and preservation of information about the physical and
biological diversity of this territory. Chapter 2, “The Austrian Idea,” recasts
the long debate over the late Habsburg Monarchy’s ideological underpinnings
or lack thereof. It calls attention to the spatial character of emerging justifications for the empire and to the empirical research programs they rested
on, which shaped the human and natural sciences alike. Chapter 3, “The
Imperial-Royal Scientist,” introduces the figure of the kaiserlich und königlich

Climate and Empire 21

scientist— like Hann, an expert on the territory of the Monarchy as a whole.
Chapter 4, “The Dual Task,” charts the construction in the 1840s and 1850s of
an empire-spanning geophysical observing network and a central observatory
in Vienna— an institution whose responsibilities were described as “dual,”
serving both knowledge of particular places and of universal processes.
Part 2, “The Scales of Empire,” focuses on the problems of scale facing
the scientific servants of the Habsburg Monarchy and the representational
techniques they developed in response. Chapter 5, “The Face of the Empire,”
traces the rise of cartographic and painterly efforts to achieve a synthetic
overview of the Monarchy. Chapter 6, “The Invention of Climatography,”
introduces a nineteenth-century genre that aimed to make atmospheric data
meaningful to readers of many backgrounds. Chapter 7, “The Power of Local
Differences,” tracks the spread of the metaphor that linked Habsburg ideology to the physics of the atmosphere. Chapter 8, “Planetary Disturbances,”
analyzes the physical-mathematical description of climate produced by Hann
and his colleagues as the fruit of their practices of scaling.
Part 3, “The Work of Scaling,” relies on scientists’ unpublished letters and
diaries to reconstruct the social and personal dimensions of the process of scaling. In the Austrian press and parliament in the 1870s and 1880s, arguments
raged over the climatic consequences of deforestation and swamp drainage.
Chapter 9, “The Forest-Climate Question,” illustrates scaling as a social process by showing how imperial-royal scientists intervened to rescale this debate.
Chapter 10, “The Floral Archive,” considers plants as tools of temporal scaling, showing how botany became a crucial source of knowledge of climatic
history. Finally, chapter 11, “Landscapes of Desire,” turns to the private side of
scaling. Comparing scientists’ intimate accounts with published sources, this
chapter explores the emotional experience of the imperial-royal scientist as he
reoriented his sense of near and far. The conclusion considers the legacies of
Habsburg climatology for twentieth-century central Europe and the present
climate crisis.

*1*
Unity in Diversity

Chapter 1

The Habsburgs and the
Collection of Nature

In 1867 Anton Kerner von Marilaun made a historic discovery in the mountains northwest of Innsbruck, where he was professor of botany. To explain
its significance, he was obliged to turn back three hundred years. It was then,
in the mid-sixteenth century, that the cultivation of auriculas (see figure 3)
had caught on in Holland and spread to England and beyond, triggering a
demand for the flowers second only to the craze for tulips. The auricula was,
to Kerner’s knowledge, the only Alpine flower to have become a “widespread
ornamental plant in gardens.”1 High-born ladies had enjoyed an abundant
selection of these beauties at Viennese markets. But the geographical origin of
the auricula was unknown, and Kerner set out to uncover its story.
Kerner’s historical detective work led him to the writings of Carolus Clusius
(1526– 1609), perhaps the most celebrated European naturalist of the sixteenth
century. Clusius, from Flanders, had come to Vienna in 1573 at the bidding of
Emperor Maximilian II, who sought to collect everything that was rare, beautiful, or useful in nature.2 The Flemish botanist was tasked with developing a
medical garden for the imperial palace. As Kerner noted, gardeners proved eager to send Clusius plants. Many varieties came from the Mediterranean, others
from Turkey and the Banat.3 Clusius, meanwhile, had an uncommon passion
for Alpine flowers. In fact, he took great pains to grow these high-altitude plants
in Vienna. Even his failures were instructive, as Kerner explained. It appeared
that many Alpine varieties were unhappy with the warmer conditions in Vienna, even if some managed to thrive in the garden’s shadier spots. In the end,
Clusius was able to cultivate two varieties, which Kerner identified by their
Linnaean names, Primula auricula L. and Primula pubescens Jacq. The latter,

26

Chapter One

F i g u r e 3 . Illustration of an auricula by Clusius, 1601.

according to Kerner, was a hybrid of the former and another variety. The hybrid, which came to be known simply as the auricula, reproduced vigorously
and with dazzling variations.4 It found its way from Vienna to merchants in
Antwerp and soon became the basis of the new botanical craze.
But where had the flower come from? Clusius had first encountered and
described auriculas in the Vienna garden of the physician Johann Aichholz.5 All
Aichholz knew was that the plant had been a gift from a noblewoman. Hearing
that the auricula was common “in the Alps near Innsbruck,” Clusius set out
to find it. This was a remarkable undertaking in an age when mountains were
still regarded as godforsaken wilderness.6 Yet Clusius searched “the highest
passages of the Austrian and Styrian Alps in vain.”7 To later generations of botanists, the origins of the auricula remained a mystery. Many searched the Alps for
it, but it was nowhere to be found in the wild. That is, until 1867, when Kerner
first discovered the plant (Primula pubescens Jacq.) growing amid limestone

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 27

and slate on a steep hill above the village of Gschnitz, at an elevation of seventeen
hundred to eighteen hundred meters. This discovery meant so much to Kerner
that he chose to build a summer villa for his family on that very site. In 1874,
when he was ennobled by Emperor Franz Josef in recognition of his scientific
service to the state, the auricula became the basis for his family’s coat of arms.
One might wonder why the flower’s origin had remained a mystery all this
time. As we will see in chapter 10, Kerner would glimpse a possible answer to
that question as he began to decipher the climatic history of the eastern Alps.
For the present chapter, the question is this: why would a nineteenth-century
scientist have worked so hard to reconstruct the efforts of a plant collector
who had been dead for three centuries? As director of the botanical gardens
in Innsbruck in the 1860s and later in Vienna, Kerner believed he could not
reform these institutions without understanding their historical development.
In order to chart a course for the future, one needed to appreciate “how, in the
course of time, botanical gardens had come to possess the collections that we
find in them today.” The director needed to know not only what the garden
contained, but why. He had to learn to read the garden for clues to the “state
of botany at the time. . . . The dominant ideas of an age in the sciences are like
the air we must breathe. They have a refreshing and invigorating influence not
only on the intellectual lives of individuals, but also on all our institutions.”8
Kerner’s point was that the garden was an archive for the study of both natural
history and the history of natural knowledge.
This argument signals Kerner’s intention to contribute to the writing of
imperial history. The discipline of imperial or “whole-state” (Gesamtstaat)
history had first emerged at Habsburg law faculties in the early nineteenth
century, when its goal had been to piece together the legal basis of the dynasty’s “historic rights” to the crown lands.9 By the 1860s, however, this narrow vision had expanded. In the words of the historian and imperial adviser
Joseph Chmel, the historian now had a “far more difficult, but all the more
valued responsibility”: to explain the Austrian Empire as “one of the most
remarkable natural phenomena, as a practical solution to a daunting problem
of nature”— that is, the problem of uniting “the most varied nationalities and
education levels in one state.”10 This new imperial history would recover the
development of the arts and sciences in the Habsburg lands since 1526; it
would promote “the intellectual union of the Austrian lands.”11 Documenting
the natural world region by region was central to this initiative. “Is it not part of
a region’s history to know how it has come to be and how it has gradually taken
shape; to know on what kind of ground we are standing . . . ? . . . The oldest

28

Chapter One

regional history is furnished by the work of the geologist, the physicist, the
geographer; their research must teach us how Austria gradually took form.”12
Imperial history would have to include both a history of natural science in
Austria and an account of the development of the natural environment itself.13
This chapter considers the consequences of this project for the production
of climatological and related knowledge in nineteenth-century Austria. The
long rule of the Habsburg dynasty in central Europe ensured that environmental knowledge accumulated in repositories of many kinds, including botanical
gardens, libraries, mineral collections, herbariums, weather diaries, and map
collections. In these institutions, nineteenth-century scholars found material
for their own histories of nature, science, and empire.

The Birth of the Imperial Idea
Anton Kerner looked back at the late sixteenth century and saw a crucial turning
point in the history of natural knowledge. Not only did the wellborn begin to devote their leisure time to travel and collecting. They also began to take a scholarly
interest in “domestic”— or what we might call “indigenous”— nature.14 These
trends were manifest in the reorientation of princely gardens from narrowly
medical purposes to the collection of “wonders,” whether native or exotic. This
quest for nature’s wonders was fueled by the ambitions of Habsburg princes.
In 1526 the Habsburgs met with the good fortune that would define their
political predicament for the next four hundred years. Hungary had been defeated by the Ottomans at the Battle of Mohacs. The death of the Hungarian
king on the battlefield and a complicated set of marriage agreements left the
house of Habsburg with both the Hungarian and Bohemian crowns. In this
way, the Habsburg Monarchy became a strange new beast, “a complex composed of different and overlapping historico-political, ethnic, and later, also
administrative units.”15 In what were known as the Austrian hereditary lands
(including Upper Austria; Lower Austria; the duchies of Styria, Carinthia, and
Carniola; the principalities of Istria, Gorizia and Trieste; and the more recently
acquired county of Tyrol), the power of the dynasty was already established.
Its authority was much looser in the remaining lands of the Holy Roman Empire, which the Habsburgs ruled continuously (with the exception of one fiveyear gap in the eighteenth century) from 1438 until its dissolution in the midst
of the Napoleonic Wars in 1806. Thus the Habsburg lands resembled a Venn
diagram of partially overlapping dominions: Hungary and Croatia lay outside
the Holy Roman Empire, while many of the German principalities lay outside
the Austrian hereditary lands.

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 29

The territorial windfall that the Habsburgs received in 1526– 27 was a mixed
blessing from the start. The Ottoman Empire was still in control of parts of
Hungary and poised to expand further north and west. Concurrently, the Protestant Reformation was threatening to rip apart the Holy Roman Empire. Emperors Ferdinand I (king of Bohemia, Hungary, and Croatia from 1526 and Holy
Roman Emperor from 1558 to 1564), Maximilian II (1564– 76), and Rudolf II
(1576– 1612) all attempted to stave off a direct confrontation between Catholic
and Protestant rulers, while presenting themselves as defenders of Christendom against the Ottomans. Not until the early seventeenth century would the
Habsburgs abandon this policy of irenicism and embark on the forceful suppression of Protestantism.16 The sixteenth-century Habsburg rulers styled
themselves as heirs to a universalist legacy— that of the ancient Roman Empire
and of the “Holy Roman Empire” founded by Charlemagne in the year 800.

N at u r e a n d E m p i r e
In Kerner’s own day, in the face of burgeoning nationalist movements, the
house of Habsburg was revisiting older ideas and symbols. The Renaissance
iconography of Habsburg power got a new lease on life. Architects, for instance, crowned countless buildings with female figures meant to personify
Austria, an allegorical motif that dated back to the late sixteenth-century reign
of Rudolf II. Likewise, nineteenth-century sculptors designed fountains to
illustrate the convergence of the Monarchy’s four principal rivers, mimicking a
famous water feature built for Rudolf ’s father, Maximilian II (see figure 4). The
1860s and 1870s even saw a renaissance of tableaux vivants, in which actors
enacted allegories of imperial unity, just as princes and princesses had done
at the Habsburg courts of the sixteenth century.17 As we will see, allusions
and artifacts like these were part of a modern visual and material culture that
preserved an older way of thinking about nature and empire, in terms of an
intimate relationship between microcosm and macrocosm.
It was in the sixteenth century that Habsburg rulers had begun to link the
careful observation and representation of the natural world to their political
ideal of universal harmony. Like many other European rulers of their day, the
Habsburgs sought to demonstrate their power by displaying collections of rarities. From the late sixteenth century, in northern Europe and Italy, it became
common for princes to house cabinets of curiosity or Wunderkammer. The
category of “wonders” included rare specimens of animate and inanimate nature (naturalia), marvelous works of art (artificialia), and ingenious scientific
instruments (scientifica). Many Renaissance natural philosophers believed

30

Chapter One

F i g u r e 4 . Wien, Freyung mit Austriabrunnen, by Rudolf von Alt, 1847. Von Alt’s watercolor illustrates the newly erected fountain, featuring allegories of the four major rivers of the
Austrian territory at that time, the Danube, Elbe, Po, and Vistula.

that objects in nature contained hidden, symbolic meanings. Things pointed
beyond themselves to a web of interrelations, which might link a given species
to seemingly unrelated objects and, ultimately, to the cosmos as a whole. Individual objects might therefore provide symbolic or perhaps even magical
control of the world at large. Paracelsus, a physician and alchemist at the court
of Maximilian I, used the skills of artisans to show how power over the world
could be derived from the imitation of nature’s own creative processes.18 Thus
Wunderkammer conveyed the message that power over nature constituted
power over the human world.19
As Kerner noted, the sixteenth century also saw the rise of a new, empirical approach to natural knowledge. In fact, more recent historians have argued that collections of wonders played an essential role in stimulating the
close observation of natural specimens. Accordingly, the meaning of scientific
“experience” began to shift from an Aristotelian ideal of knowledge of the
common course of nature, to a modern emphasis on knowledge of particular
“facts.”20 This was a global phenomenon, in the sense that such collections
could eventually be found in many parts of Europe, and they in turn depended
on networks of exchange with Africa, Asia, and the New World. Within this

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 31

global historical transition, the collections of the Habsburgs were of special
significance. In the judgment of historian Bruce Moran, “it was especially at
the courts of the imperial Hapsburgs that collections grew to unprecedented
proportions.”21
The Habsburgs sought to illustrate the universality of their rule by expanding their collections to a truly encyclopedic scope. Three were particularly
noteworthy. The cabinet of Ferdinand II of Tyrol (1529– 95) in Ambras Castle,
outside of Innsbruck, was famous for its variety of natural objects.22 The gardens and menageries of Ferdinand II’s brother, Emperor Maximilian II, were
renowned for their rare plants and animals, including medicinal plants from
the Americas, tulips from Turkey, and an elephant that arrived in Vienna in
1552.23 Even more remarkable than these two was the collection of Maximilian II’s eldest son, Emperor Rudolf II, who moved his court to Prague.
Rudolf ’s collection included works of art, beautifully crafted scientific instruments, such as terrestrial and celestial globes, but also minerals, plants, and
animals.24 Thomas Kaufmann, the leading interpreter of Rudolf ’s collections,
argues that the emperor prized his collections as a microcosm of the world he
sought to rule. His castle in Prague contained a wing specially designed to
house the collection, with an anteroom decorated with cosmic motifs: Jupiter,
the four elements, the twelve months of the year.25 Likewise, his gardens were
designed with mathematical precision and according to classical architectural
theory, such that garden and museum could “serve as a key to the understanding and study of the harmony of the creative universe.”26 Other princes may
have harbored similar aspirations, but Rudolf turned the dream into a systematic enterprise, recruiting an entire team of naturalists to seek out natural
wonders and learn their powers. What’s more, historians consider Rudolf ’s
collection to mark the origin of the institution of the research museum, where
naturalists could study specimens in person. Unlike most Wunderkammer,
these displays were not arranged to dazzle the viewer, but to invite patient
attention.27
Like Rudolf II’s naturalia, works of art on display at Habsburg courts often
carried a political message. Paintings and sculptures represented the dynasty’s universal dominion by evoking subtle interconnections between microcosm and macrocosm. For instance, a fountain designed by Wenzel Jamnitzer
for Maximilian II and completed in 1578 was an ingenious incarnation of the
Habsburgs’ aspiration to govern a universal realm. Symbolized by an eagle,
their empire soars over figures representing aspects of the natural world: the
four elements, the rivers of the dynasty’s lands (Rhine, Danube, Elbe, and
Tiber), and the four seasons, all crowned by a celestial globe.28 The eagle is

32

Chapter One

thus the instrument of union among parts of the natural world existing at different scales, spatial and temporal. Or consider the famous portrait of Rudolf II as
Vertumnus, the Roman god of the seasons, painted circa 1590 by the Italian artist Arcimboldo, who served three consecutive Habsburg emperors. Rudolf ’s
face is composed of plants that grow in every season of the year, from spring
flowers to fall gourds. In Kaufmann’s reading of this painting, it is an “allegory
of the imperial dominion over the macrocosm.” Like a garden or a naturalia
collection, the painting is an assemblage of “the world in small.” “As the emperor rules over the body politic, so he may be seen to rule over the microcosm
of his collection— which in turn mirrors the greater world, or macrocosm, that
Arcimboldo’s paintings also reflect.”29 One last example illustrates this motif
particularly vividly. In 1571 a “tournament” was staged to celebrate the marriage of Archduke Karl to Maria, the daughter of the Duke of Bavaria. Choreographed by Arcimboldo and performed by members of Maximilian’s court, it
featured Maximilian himself in the role of “winter” and others as “personifications of the rivers of Europe, metals, planets, European countries, continents,
seasons, elements, and the liberal arts. In short the tournament represented the
macrocosm or greater world through the microcosm of man.” As Kaufmann
concludes, “the tournament obviously represented the cohesion of Europe
under the Habsburgs, and in turn the Habsburgs’ dominion over the world.”30
It’s worth pausing here to note that these examples illustrate a very different
understanding of the relationship between part and whole than is familiar in
the sciences today. The relationship is not statistical: the part does not instantiate or stand as an exception to the whole. Nor is the relationship causal in the
modern sense of being linked by a chain of intermediate physical actions and
reactions. Rather, these Mannerist creations presume that part and whole are
aligned by the actions of hidden forces. On this view, individual human bodies
and souls respond directly to the motions of heavenly bodies or the cycle of the
seasons. This cosmological outlook was not uncommon in Europe at the time,
but it seems that Rudolf II welcomed it like no other ruler. It also provided a
framework for thinking about weather and climate in the sixteenth century.

M e t e o r o l o g i c a l T h e o r y a n d O b s e r va t i o n
The age of Maximilian II and Rudolf II was a time when learned men were contemplating competing cosmologies. Natural philosophers were questioning the
Aristotelian doctrine of the celestial spheres and attempting to come to terms
with Copernicus’s heretical thesis. Theories of weather and climate were likewise in flux. In the Aristotelian tradition of natural philosophy that dominated

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 33

the Renaissance universities, meteorology was the study of the causes of “meteors,” a category that included storms, floods, earthquakes, and comets. These
were explained in terms of the “exhalations” of the earth and atmosphere,
which were understood to act on different forms of matter in different ways.
This branch of knowledge was little concerned with observation in a modern
sense, because learned men believed that causal explanation must derive from
knowledge of the common course of nature, not from experience of particular
instances. A second tradition of weather knowledge in the medieval tradition
was astrometeorology, which flourished at Renaissance courts. Astrometeorology, unlike Aristotelian meteorology, was observational and predictive. It
sought to forecast weather on the basis of the positions of celestial bodies.
Here in all likelihood lies the motivation behind the observations of weather
that were occasionally recorded in the margins of almanacs and ephemerides
in the early Middle Ages. On the basis of such observations, predictions could
be tested and discrepancies recorded between predicted and actual weather.31
At the Habsburg courts, learned men resolved these contradictions in eclectic ways. Tycho Brahe, court astronomer to Rudolf II, borrowed from Stoic
cosmology and Paracelsan alchemy. In contrast to Aristotelian cosmology,
which assumed that the medium pervading the heavens was separate from
the terrestrial atmosphere, the Stoics conceived of this celestial substance as
fluid and continuous with the earth. From this perspective, the influence of
the planets on earthly weather could be understood as a direct action by this
universal fluid. Brahe believed, moreover, that this same fluid served as the
vital substance of living things.32 Astrometeorology was therefore an essential
aid to the practice of medicine.
Johannes Kepler, Brahe’s successor at the Prague court, had been responsible for producing astrological calendars while provincial astronomer in Graz
from 1594 to 1600. These calendars specified, for instance, when a physician
should bleed a patient or even a particular part of the patient’s body; they even
dictated when a patient should bathe. To Kepler, astrology was fundamentally
like medicine, in that both required generating prognoses based on causes that
remained hidden. Kepler went so far as to suggest that the physician and the
astrologer studied phenomena that were causally analogous. Just as a human
soul at birth receives light rays from the planets that influence its future course,
so the soul of the earth reacts to light from the heavens and responds with corresponding meteorological phenomena. For Kepler, as for Brahe before him,
the astrological principle of a resonance between microcosm and macrocosm
validated attempts to apply knowledge of human-scale forces to theories of
the cosmos.33

34

Chapter One

It was undoubtedly to test the predictions of astrometeorology that Brahe
and Kepler embarked on some of the earliest systematic weather records.34 In
Europe, systematic weather observations have survived from as early as the late
fifteenth century, recorded by the astronomers Peurbach and Regiomantanus,
both of whom served the Habsburg emperor Frederick III.35 According to
historical climatologists, the practice of keeping a weather diary spread from
the University of Kraków through much of central and northern Europe in
the late fifteenth century.36 This habit became increasingly common in the
humanist circle around Frederick’s son Maximilian I, often in connection with
astrometeorology.37
Other practical motivations for weather observing came from medicine,
botany, and agriculture. For instance, the first long-term systematic weather
records in the Austrian hereditary lands were launched in the 1540s by the
physician Johann Aichholz, in whose medical garden Clusius first encountered the auricula.38 Aichholz was then at the start of a stellar career. In the
plague epidemic of 1558, he was appointed “Magister sanitatis” and two
years later sent to Hungary to tend to an ailing Count Nadasdy. Although
he had converted to Protestantism, the emperor allowed him to teach as
the youngest member of the medical faculty at the University of Vienna,
where he was elected dean five times and rector in 1574. In 1581, when the
emperor fell sick, Aichholz was called to Prague to treat him. Alone among
the weather diarists of his circle, he showed no sign of interest in astrometeorology, and may instead have been trying to track conditions favorable to
gardening.
Aichholz and his contemporaries may also have been motivated by their experiences of climatic variability. The late sixteenth century marked a period of
cooling in Europe that has been linked to harvest failures and food shortages,
and which seems to have played a significant role in the political upheavals
of the first half of the seventeenth century.39 Thus, what is known today of
the European climate circa 1600 comes in part from weather diaries kept by
scholars patronized by the Habsburgs.40

Microcosm and Macrocosm
in the Nineteenth Century
The multiple cosmologies of the sixteenth century did not die a sudden death,
neither with the advent of Newtonian science in the seventeenth century nor
with the battle of the Aufklärer against “superstition” in the eighteenth. How
individual minds and bodies might respond to the vicissitudes of earthly

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 35

weather— and to the more distant oscillations of celestial bodies— remained a
live question in the nineteenth century.
Kepler, for instance, was celebrated by nineteenth-century Habsburg scientists as a model of free inquiry. Despite his Protestantism, his statue adorned a
landing of the stairwell leading up to the observatory of Kremsmunster Abbey,
where Julius Hann trained as a gymnasium student.41 Thinkers as different as
the Vienna physicist Andreas Baumgartner and the Prague aesthetician Josef
Durdik acknowledged the central role of Kepler’s cosmic mysticism in his
elucidation of the planetary orbits.42 Perhaps the most insightful commentary on Kepler came from the Moravian-born astronomer Norbert Herz, director of a private observatory in Vienna. Herz drew attention to the causal
model that underlay Kepler’s astrometeorology, his theory of the earth-soul or
“sensitive earth.” Are we justified, Herz asked, in viewing this as an error on
Kepler’s part? In answer, Herz pointed to the ignorance of the science of his
own day, at a time when Sigmund Freud was still employing hypnosis to treat
his neurotic patients in the Berggasse. Herz observed that “alongside certain
impulses that influence and move our mind, our entire being, for which, in
the course of time . . . we believe to have found an apparently sufficient explanation,” there were others that had not yet “reached that stage of knowledge”
and which were still designated as “marvelous,” “mysterious,” “mystical,” or
“still unexplained.”43 While the psychiatry of his day tracked the “mystery” of
human emotions inward, to innate drives, Herz instead followed it outward,
with Kepler, to the “effect of inorganic nature on the organic being.”44 The
foundation of Kepler’s astrology lay in the “mysterious power” of the natural
environment, or what Kepler called the “affinity between heaven and earth.”
Whether or not Kepler’s astrology was a form of superstition was not for the
modern-day scientist to judge. Herz pointed out that the meteorology of his
own day had “likewise postulated certain connections between terrestrial and
cosmic phenomena,” by which he meant the correlation of climate with sunspots. “Belief! Superstition! Where is the line that divides them?”
Herz was not alone in urging research into the sensitivity of the human
psyche to geophysical conditions.45 One of the first writers to use the term
“unconscious” (das Unbewußte) in the modern sense of “inaccessible to
consciousness” (rather than “innocent” or “artless”) was Romuald Lang, an
instructor of geography and history at the gymnasium of the Kremsmunster
Abbey, where Julius Hann was among his students. In “The Unconscious in
Man” (1858), Lang insisted on “the great influence of climate, the atmosphere,
nutrition, and so forth on the constitution and health of the body.” He sought
to understand this influence in terms of an alternative cosmology, one that

36

Chapter One

acknowledged the interdependence of human and nonhuman nature. “For
the human microcosm is an organic part of the macrocosm. . . . The history
of an individual finds its foundation and its explanation only in relation to the
cosmos as a whole.” It was not long after taking Lang’s classes that the young
Julius Hann began to explore his own susceptibility to the natural environment, as we will see in chapter 11.
Astrometeorology survived as well in popular weather almanacs, which offered forecasts for a year or even an entire century, based on the positions of
the moon and planets. These continued to sell well in the nineteenth century
throughout the Habsburg lands, as in much of Europe and North America.46
In fact, in Habsburg languages other than German, this latter-day astrometeorology made up the bulk of the meteorological literature. At the start of the
nineteenth century, approximately eight annual weather almanacs were published in Czech per year; by the 1850s, this number had risen to twelve to fifteen. In addition, Czech readers could choose from a whole series of hundredyear calendars.47 Bohuslav Hrudicka, an early twentieth-century meteorologist
in Brno, found these nineteenth-century publications to be remarkably similar
to the earliest printed almanacs in Czech from the fifteenth century, down to
the repetition of some of the same mnemonic verses. At the same time, newer
versions of astrometeorology laid claim to scientific authority, such as the disaster prophecies of the Styrian ex-theologian Rudolf Falb, which were based
on the tidal influence of the moon’s phases.48
Modern astrometeorology also took more reputable forms. Recognition
of the periodicity of sunspots in the mid-nineteenth century inspired a wave
of studies of correlations between these solar cycles and the fluctuations of
the terrestrial climate. Historians have suggested that this line of research was
particularly appealing to British scientists, who sought methods of long-term
weather prediction after famines wreaked havoc in India in the last quarter of
the nineteenth century.49 Other theories promised to explain and predict longer term variations in the terrestrial climate. In Britain, James Croll proposed
an astronomical theory for the Ice Ages, arguing that variations in the earth’s
orbit around the sun could cause significant shifts in the earth’s climate. Croll’s
language invited comparisons to astrometeorology, as he claimed that the “true
cosmical cause” of climate change “must be sought for in relations of our earth
to the sun,” and that “geological and cosmical phenomena are physically related by a bond of causation.”50 In the early twentieth century, Croll’s theory
provided inspiration to Milutin Milanković, a native of Habsburg Croatia and
a graduate of Vienna’s Technical University. Milanković’s calculations of the
variation in solar radiation due to shifts in the earth’s orbit finally turned “cos-

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 37

mic causation” into a serious, if radical, climatological hypothesis— one that
has since become a standard element of long-term climate models.51
What can these echoes of Renaissance cosmology within modern climatology tell us about scaling as a historical process? They suggest that the global
standardization of measurement in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries did not necessarily displace other ways of tracking and imagining space
and time. Older notions of proximity, simultaneity, and relatedness persisted,
notions that had nothing to do with industrial efficiency. Vanessa Ogle has
shown, for instance, that the imposition of Greenwich mean time after 1884
sparked resistance that briefly served to strengthen alternative traditions of
time keeping and time management.52 That is to say that processes of scaling
need not result in the occlusion of one measurement framework by another.
Commensuration is not always homogenization.

N at i v e E xot i ca
The quest to gather nature’s secrets at the early modern Habsburg court also
generated vital records of ecological change. As R. J. W. Evans noted in his
seminal history of the early modern Habsburg Empire, the “precise fidelity to
animate and inanimate objects” that was characteristic of sixteenth-century art
also extended to the study of local provinces.53 The passion that Maximilian II
and Rudolf II displayed for the “exotica” of the New World, Africa, and Asia
has captured the most attention from historians, but the emperors also had an
enormous appetite for “wonders” to be found closer at hand.
Aichholz, for instance, “grew many native [einheimische] plants” in his Vienna garden, as his nineteenth-century biographer would later note.54 The
humanist Martin Mylius and the theologian Caspar Schwenckfeld each published on the flora of their native Silesia. The painter Georg Hoefnagel, who
traveled throughout Europe, made exquisite drawings for Rudolf of many
species of flora and fauna, both foreign and native, along with sketches of
provincial towns and local dress. The landscape artist Roelant Savery was
inspired by Rudolf ’s fondness for the Tyrol to study its wildlife and included
many Tyrolean birds and other animals in his paintings.55 Arcimboldo, too,
drew common species, such as sheep, cats, deer, hares, and sparrows. What
the historian Paula Fichtner says of Clusius holds for many of the humanists
active at the Habsburg courts in the sixteenth century: one cannot read his
“descriptions of plants and stones from all the corners of the Habsburg imperium without appreciating how much his work added to understanding of the
natural environment of east-central Europe.”56

38

Chapter One

Part of the motivation for such work was to overturn the demeaning image
of the German lands that had been propagated in classical literature.57 Tacitus and other classical authorities had portrayed Germany as a backward,
barbaric land. By contrast, sixteenth-century central European humanists
emphasized the fertility and natural riches of their home region— a quality
that made their accounts of special interest to nineteenth-century provincial
historians.
Humanists in the patronage of Maximilian and Rudolf pursued nature’s
wonders up mountains, along rivers, and even underground. In search of alpine
plants, Clusius and the astronomer Johannes Fabricius scaled the Ötscher, an
1,893-meter peak near the border between Lower and Upper Austria. Leonhard Thurneysser studied the waters of the Danube and its tributaries and discussed their properties in his Ten Books on Mineral and Metallic Waters, while
his Magna Alchemia treated mining in Bohemia and Hungary. Šimon Tadeaš
Budek, who called himself “His Majesty’s prospector for treasures, metals,
precious stones, and all hidden secrets in the whole of nature,” collected both
geognostic information and folk legends in northwestern Bohemia.58 Anselm
Boethius de Boodt, imperial physician under Rudolf II, traveled through Bohemia and Moravia to gather information for his 1609 treatise on gems; along
the way, he collected plants to send to Clusius.59 The information these men
recorded laid the foundations for the natural histories of the Habsburg lands
written in the nineteenth century.
The lands newly conquered from the Ottomans proved particularly rich
in “exotica” for Habsburg collectors. Stolen in battle, cultural objects from
the Ottoman Empire held an important place in Habsburg collections from
the early sixteenth century.60 The same seems to have been true of naturalia
from the Ottoman lands. The naturalist Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq returned
from Constantinople to Vienna in 1562 “with the tulip and other plants that
had been uncultivated in Europe outside Turkey.”61 Clusius too traveled to
Hungary, where he encountered botanical “rarities” that included many types
of mushroom, a particular passion of his. Most remarkably, he recorded the
names of 346 plants in both Latin and Hungarian, the first compilation of
Hungarian plant names.62 Many of these species were included in Clusius’s
1601 History of Rare Plants, which treated plants he had found in Spain,
Austria, and Hungary.
In these ways, rarities came from near and far. As Kerner von Marilaun
recognized, the auricula and the tulip were equally exotic wonders in the eyes
of the sixteenth-century Viennese, although one species originated within the
borders of the empire and one without. The line between “native” and “ex-

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 39

otic” was blurred from the start, in ways that set a course for the subsequent
history of science in central Europe.63

F r o m P r i n c e ly C o l l e c t i o n s
to Provincial Museums
What became of Habsburg collections of natural knowledge in the nineteenth
century? Many were opened to the public, thanks to the wave of provincial
museums founded in the wake of Napoleon’s defeat. In the course of the first
half of the nineteenth century, patriotic museums sprang up in towns across
the Monarchy: Pest, L’viv, Graz, Brno, Opava, Prague, Ljubljana, Innsbruck,
Salzburg, and Sankt Anton. In stark contrast to the collections of Rudolf II and
his contemporaries, which were accessible only to an elite few, the new provincial museums of the post-Napoleonic era embraced the goal of educating
the public. While they invited experts to use the collections for their research,
they also encouraged the public to come and appreciate the variety of natural
resources to be found in their home province.64 What distinguished these from
other museums, founded elsewhere in Europe at the time, was the multiplicity
of forms of knowledge they sought to preserve. Anything and everything was
of interest that related to the local province, its human and nonhuman inhabitants, and its physical environment. While the new Imperial-Royal Natural
History Museum in Vienna set its sights on rarities from distant lands, the
provincial museums made space for far less exotic specimens. These museums constituted Wunderkammer, library, and archive under one roof. Indeed,
had the dynasty ever achieved its plan to centralize its archival collections, no
doubt much local environmental information would have been disposed of
or lost.65
One of the earliest models for a provincial museum was the Joanneum in
Graz.66 Founded in 1811, it was named for Archduke Johann (1782– 1859), a
pivotal figure for the history of the geosciences in Austria. He took a passionate
interest in the folk culture and landscapes of the valleys of the eastern Alps. Fittingly, he commissioned a portrait of himself in hunting gear in the hills of his
beloved Styria (see figure 5). This was no mere hobby. Rather, it reflected his
ambition of crafting a new, more modern ideology of Habsburg rule: namely,
to shift the object of patriotic attachment from the dynasty to the lands of their
dominion. What he envisioned was a territorialization of Habsburg authority,
yet in a different spirit than that of the enlightened absolutists of the eighteenth
century. Johann sought to bind Austrian patriotism to an appreciation of the
uniqueness of local landscapes. The museum he founded in Graz gave pride of

40

Chapter One

F i g u r e 5 . Archduke Johann (1782– 1859).

place to mineralogical and zoological specimens, such as stuffed birds replete
with eggs and nests. It served as the model for other provincial museums that
opened across the Habsburg lands in the following decades.
The displays and publications produced by these museums helped to
crystallize distinct regional as opposed to national identities. In Bohemia and
Moravia, for instance, the provincial museums published research reports in
both German and Czech. This was a way to support the linguistic demands of
Czech nationalists, while also aligning the museum with a regional— and thus
nonnational— identity. At the time, such regional identities were understood
as parts of a greater whole. The Joanneum, for instance, highlighted its debt
to the house of Habsburg in its very name. As Werner Telesko argues, these
museums did not aim for “a provincial and autonomous self-conception, but
rather presented the idea of a supranational space and identity, which also
manifested itself in their collections.” They emphasized both “regional patri-

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 41

otism” and “trans-regional inter-connections,” a duality resolved by the identification of the regions themselves with the supranational state and dynasty.67
This system of provincial museums preserved records of local natural history and made them available to nineteenth-century researchers. In the wake
of the Napoleonic Wars, Habsburg scholars mined these resources to assemble
both patriotic regional histories and inventories of local natural resources. For
instance, Kaspar von Sternberg, the founder of the Bohemian National Museum in Prague, composed his Outline of a History of Bohemian Mines (1836)
and its accompanying map on the basis of extensive research in regional archives. Much as Kerner would argue in the case of botany, Sternberg believed
that the effective management of mining depended on historical knowledge.
This was true “not simply in order to orient oneself in the field, but also in
order to get to know the reasons why mining was led into decline, in order to
identify and avoid these.” Moreover, Sternberg saw the history of mining as
an inextricable part of the history of Bohemia. His historical research relied
so heavily on esoteric archival documents that he found it impossible to knit it
together into a narrative, for which he apologized. “Indeed there could not be
many researchers who would have the desire and patience to undertake such
a painstaking effort in the dust of old, rarely visited archives and go to such
trouble to procure the oldest certificates and reports.”68

Reinventing the Past
As nineteenth-century authors like Sternberg constructed their provincial natural histories, they rediscovered, reprinted, and reinterpreted sixteenth-century
accounts of the natural world. So, for instance, the 1877 Topographie von Niederösterreich traced attempts to construct a mathematically precise map of the
region back to Fabricius. It memorialized Fabricius’s ascent of the Ötscher in
1574, in the company of Clusius and Aichholz, in order to determine the position and height of the peak using astronomical instruments.69 Eduard Suess’s
pioneering contributions to historical seismology made use of accounts of the
earthquake of 1590 that he found in the Lower Austrian provincial archive. In
Czech-speaking circles, scientists turned back to sixteenth-century almanacs
as the starting point for histories of astronomy and meteorology.70 In some of
these cases, sixteenth-century sources proved genuinely useful to nineteenthcentury science. In other cases, modern scientists cited these forerunners in
order to establish their work as part of a centuries-old Habsburg tradition.
Seen through a nineteenth-century lens, Brahe, Kepler, and Clusius appeared as pioneers of a patriotic tradition of Landeskunde, the study of the

42

Chapter One

region as a natural, social, and cultural unit. We find Clusius, for instance, cast
as a practitioner of Landeskunde despite his cosmopolitan life. Analogously,
Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler were embraced as part of a Czech intellectual tradition. Both were cited in Czech publications as pioneers of meteorology and astronomy in Bohemia. Likewise, the maps drawn by Fabricius and
Jan Amos Komensky (Comenius) in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth
centuries were reprinted as foundations of a Moravian vlastiveda, or regional
science.71 In this way, descriptions of nature’s rarities that had shown little
regard for their distribution in space were reinvented as early forms of provincial patriotism.
It was for the sake of Landeskunde, for instance, that a local archivist in
Bohemia published a trove of Renaissance weather diaries in the 1880s and
1890s. Wenzel Katzerowsky was a gymnasium instructor and the archivist for
the city of Litomeřice/Leitmeritz in Bohemia. When he was a child, his parents’ house had been struck by a small meteor, which crashed right through
the roof. This was the start of his lifelong fascination with meteorology, in the
broad Aristotelian sense. Throughout his career as an archivist, Katzerowsky
worked assiduously to reconstruct the climatic history of the area around
Litomeřice/Leitmeritz, from the earliest records to his own instrumental observations. He combed local archives and even private collections in search
of weather diaries, which he resourcefully combined with all manner of municipal records. Since the observations came from different sources, Katzerowsky helped to produce a continuous record by including proxy information for the later period, such as extreme weather events, harvest dates, and
crop prices. In this way, he managed to publish a more or less continuous
record of observations in Litomeřice/Leitmeritz covering the period 1454 to
1892.72 These records have since been used repeatedly by historical climatologists, and the director of the local museum in Litomeřice today carries on this
research.73
Sixteenth-century naturalists also figured prominently in the new imperial
histories of the nineteenth century. In these cases, however, they appeared as
“Austrian” naturalists in the new whole-state sense. Thus Clusius was portrayed by the director of the imperial-royal herbarium as an expert on “Austrian” plants and plant names. He was “the first scholar of the flora of Austria,”
and the first to report “the occurrence of more than a hundred varieties of
mushroom in our empire.” It was only fitting that every subsequent scholar of
Austria’s flora should “linger affectionately” on his work.74 Similarly, the geologist Franz von Hauer, later the director of the imperial Museum of Natural History, identified Renaissance scholars such as Georg Agricola and Rudolf II’s

The Habsburgs and the Collection of Nature 43

physician Anselm de Boodt as “the first founders of geological knowledge of
Austria.”75

Conclusion
When von Hauer addressed the Academy of Sciences in Vienna at a ceremonial meeting in 1861, he presented a historical narrative of the rise of geology
that argued for the patriotic orientation of this science since the time of Agricola. Saluting the military officers in his audience two years after Austria’s
defeat at Solferino, he described the historical role of the imperial scientist as
analogous to theirs. “Intellectual progress” was the surest way to “replace the
bonds that have weakened in this state” and to “establish a more secure base
for the great power of our empire.”76 Indeed, nineteenth-century scientists
stressed their debt to dynastic institutions and traditions of research dating
back to the sixteenth century. These include the princely collections that were
to become the provincial museums of the nineteenth century, with their rich
stores of naturalia and historical documentation. These also include visual
techniques developed by naturalists in the service of the Habsburg state for
depicting precise detail in relation to a systematic overview. In the sixteenth
century, answers to this challenge included Mannerist paintings and sculpture,
books of flora and fauna, the design of botanical gardens, the organization of
the Kunstkammer, and the staging of spectacles in which human players embodied the harmonious union of the parts of the empire and of the cosmos.
After 1848, genres like these were revived and others invented to illustrate the
theme of unity in diversity, now with a new urgency in the face of the challenge
that modern nationalism posed to the unity of the Habsburg lands.

Chapter 2

The Austrian Idea

The late Habsburg Monarchy has been said to have suffered from an ideological
deficit. The dynasty had traditionally justified its rule as divinely ordained, portraying their lands as the fulfillment of the medieval dream of universal empire, as
the “bulwark of Christendom” against the “infidel” Ottomans, and as a mediator
between “West” and “East.” Those arguments faltered with the waning of the
Ottoman threat to Europe in the eighteenth century. Thereafter, the Habsburgs
styled themselves as patrons of the arts and sciences, as incubators of enlightenment, and, most ambitiously, as the protectors of the panoply of cultures under
their rule. This idea of “unity in diversity” has looked so weak in retrospect,
viewed through the scrim of twentieth-century nationalism, that it has hardly
seemed to merit the attention of intellectual historians. As A. J. P. Taylor put it in
his classic history, “Francis Joseph was an Emperor without ideas; this was his
strength and enabled him to survive. Yet, by the end of the nineteenth century,
ideas made a state and kept it going. . . . An ‘Austrian idea’ had to be found. The
phrase was everywhere; the translation into practice never took place.”1
It is ironic that Taylor, defender of the “small nations,” was echoing a position common among nineteenth-century German nationalists. To them, too,
the Habsburg dynasty seemed to have been depleted of a legitimating ideology.
The anti-Semitic Prussian conservative Paul de Lagarde, who hoped to see
all of central Europe unified under Prussian domination, wrote in 1853 that
“Austria has at present no idea holding it together.”2 In the absence of such a
unifying “idea,” Lagarde warned that Austria was destined to “descend into
materialism.” Austria, in Lagarde’s view, was the massive animal body to which
Prussia would supply the rational mind.

The Austrian Idea

45

But perhaps Taylor, like Lagarde, was blinded by a narrow preconception
of what an “idea” is and where to find one. Taylor had been looking for glimmerings of a new idea in high politics, in the transnational ideologies of political parties like the Christian Socials or Social Democrats. More generally, historians have identified nineteenth-century justifications for Austria-Hungary’s
existence associated with four domains: military defense, politics, culture, and
economics. Let us briefly survey each in turn.
From the perspective of much of western Europe in the nineteenth century, Austria remained a military necessity. Even after the decline of Ottoman
power, it formed a defense against Russia. As the Habsburg-loyal Hungarian
statesman Count Gyula (Julius) Andrassy argued in 1897, Austria’s expansion
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries had made Hungary even more vital
to its security. He likened Galicia, Bohemia, and Tyrol to Vorwerke, in the
medieval sense of fortified castles outside the walled city, while Hungary was
the Festungskern, the heart of the monarchy’s fortifications. “Austria consists
of provinces that protrude and extend into foreign territories and are only
barely connected to each other,” and an enemy could “easily cut them off
from each other.” Hungary, he argued, made “Austria’s defense system into an
enclosed whole.”3 This military justification for Austria-Hungary’s existence
foundered, however, on the question of the organization of its military force.
The Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 had divided the empire into
two halves, ruled independently of each other, sharing only financial, foreign,
and military policy. The Habsburg Common Army was the only institution
that served both halves. Because the army introduced universal conscription
at this time, it also became the only institution with a potentially formative
influence on most male citizens of the empire.4 However, conscripted soldiers had the right to receive training in their native language, in keeping with
the principle of the formal equality of the empire’s official languages. This
meant that the army was obliged to form separate regiments for up to twelve
Habsburg languages.5 In the eyes of many critics at home and abroad, this
multilingual military seemed anachronistic in the age of what the Napoleonic
general Antoine-Henri Jomini called “national war.” These critics suspected
that the efficacy of universal conscription in countries like Prussia and France
hinged on the motivating force of nationalism.
A second category of argument for the supranational empire viewed it as
a means to political ends— that is, as a vehicle for defending the civic rights
of its citizens, or more often, the rights of one particular class. Consider the
position of Austro-Slavism, most closely associated with the Bohemian historian František Palacky. In 1848, Palacky declined an invitation to participate

46

Chapter Two

in the Frankfurt Parliament’s attempt to create a Pan-German state. He gave
two reasons: first, that he identified as a Czech, not a German; and second,
that he believed Austria’s survival to be a political necessity. Had Austria not
existed, he wrote, it would have been necessary to invent it “in the interest
of Europe, in the interest of humanity.”6 Palacky argued in his 1866 The Idea
of the Austrian State that Austria’s modern purpose was to defend the political equality of the many different national groups within its territory. In
casting the Monarchy’s purpose as political in nature, Palacky’s justification
bears comparison to two later ideologies, both with strong electoral power in
Austria. Austro-Marxism envisioned the Monarchy as the basis for a future
democratic workers’ federation. By contrast, Christian Socialism aligned the
Habsburg state with the mission of defeating both socialism and liberalism. Instead, it posited the supranational state as the protector of Catholic craftsmen
and small tradesmen. What Austro-Slavism, Austro-Marxism, and Christian
Socialism shared was the premise that Habsburg unity served a political end.
A third category of argument for Austria-Hungary’s survival was cultural in
character. This view was related to Palacky’s Austro-Slavism, in so far as it presumed the intrinsic value of national diversity and Austria’s power to protect
it. This was the claim advanced by the monumental twenty-four-volume series
spearheaded by Crown Prince Rudolf in the 1880s, The Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy in Word and Image, which celebrated in turn each culture that made
its home within the Habsburgs’ lands. At times, cultural arguments in defense
of Austria-Hungary took on spiritual overtones. The idea of Austria as a state
built on and promoting Christian values, for instance, by no means withered
away with the defeat of the Ottomans. After the outbreak of World War One,
it was revived in a charismatic new form by the poet Hugo von Hofmannsthal,
commissioned by the state to produce patriotic prose. Hofmannsthal reversed
the relationship between Austria and Prussia as Lagarde had described it: now
Prussia stood for the bodily virtues of efficiency and obedience, while Austria
represented the ideals of piety and humanitarianism. On this view, Austria
was the protector of the tradition of “spiritual universalism” that represented
Europe’s best hope for peace.7
Finally, a fourth argument for Austria-Hungary’s existence was economic.
It built on a tradition of northern European thought known as cameralism.
Cameralism combined a theory of nature with a prescription for governance.
On this view, nature was a divinely designed storehouse for the satisfaction of
human needs. All wants could be satisfied through a proper understanding of
nature’s own “household.” The goal of the cameralist state was to achieve a
favorable balance of trade either by acclimating foreign crops to native soil, or

The Austrian Idea

47

by substituting native products for imports, such as beets for sugarcane. It was
a program with special appeal to states like Austria with no overseas colonies.
In this way, cameralism inspired a range of subsequent programs for economic
development on the basis of the detailed study and expert husbanding of native natural resources.8
A modern economic justification for Habsburg unity took shape in the
1830s and 1840s, as British goods were flooding the markets of central Europe.
The German Customs Union was formed in 1833 in order to protect central
European agriculture and industry from British competition, but without the
participation of Austria. In arguing for the expansion of this central European
free-trade zone, Friedrich List cast it as a stage in the formation of a linguistically and culturally unified German state. In this respect, he echoed Fichte,
who had argued in 1800 that in a “closed commercial state”— that is, one in
which tariffs favored internal over external trade— “a higher degree of national
honor and a sharply determined national character will develop very quickly.”9
That is, a commercially unified state would be a nationally homogeneous state.
Among Austrian industrialists, shippers, and merchants, there was considerable support for joining the Zollverein. But their vision of central European
economic unity was coupled to the principle of national pluralism. In 1849,
Vienna’s new minister of trade, Carl Ludwig von Bruck, envisioned a central
European commercial zone under Vienna’s authority. Yet he insisted that this
would remain a multinational state, and he explicitly denounced strategies of
Germanization in southeastern Europe.10 A former director of the Austrian
Lloyd shipping concern in Trieste, von Bruck promoted dismantling internal
barriers to trade and improving transport networks. According to this argument, the economic union of central Europe would stimulate agricultural and
industrial development, and by that means cement the political unity of the
Habsburg lands.
These four nineteenth-century versions of the Austrian Idea have not escaped the notice of historians. Rather, historians have judged them naive at
best in the face of the geopolitical transformations leading up to World War
One. At worst, these arguments have been seen as apologetics for GermanAustrian and Hungarian oppression of the empire’s minorities.
This may be as far as the history of ideas can take us. But what if we pose
a slightly different question than the one formulated by Lagarde and Taylor?
Instead of asking what idea this state rested on, what if we ask what resources
Habsburg subjects possessed for thinking the idea of Austria. That is, what
concepts, practices, representations, and material tools could they draw on to
begin to situate themselves and their concerns in relation to this territory as a

48

Chapter Two

F i g u r e 6 . Allgemeine Charte der Österreichischen Monarchie zur ubersicht der neuesten
Begraenzung und Eintheilung, mit den Nebenlaendern des österreichischen Hauses in Deutschland (General Map of the Austrian Monarchy Showing the Most Recent Borders and Divisions,
Including the Neighboring Lands of the Austrian Dynasty in Germany), by K. J. Kipferling, 1803.

whole?11 To reformulate the question in this way is to move beyond a history
of ideas, toward a history of scaling.
Figure 6 shows the borders of the Habsburg lands as they stood in 1803,
following the partitions of Poland and Austria’s losses in the second coalition
war against France. This image is noteworthy as one of the first maps ever to
be published within the Habsburg lands depicting the entirety of their modern
territories. As its German title emphasizes, it is an “overview.” Until the last two
decades of the eighteenth century, despite a thriving cartographic tradition,
maps produced within the Habsburg lands had focused on local and regional
views. The Habsburgs had relied on Dutch and then French cartographers
for overviews of their territories. Accurate and complete military maps date
back to the mid-eighteenth century, but they were state secrets, existing only
in manuscript. Not until the middle of the nineteenth century did such maps
circulate widely.

The Austrian Idea

49

Following this cartographic boom, new textbooks, atlases, and even games
trained young minds to appreciate the Monarchy as a territorial unit. Adalbert
Stifter, for instance, described a geography lesson that employed maps sized in
proportion to the area of the country represented. In this way, he affirmed, “an
image of scalar relations is permanently imprinted on the active imagination
of youth.”12 For lessons in Habsburg geography, educators could purchase a
game that came with a jigsaw map and longitudinal and latitudinal measuring
rods. Before play could begin, the instructions prescribed a study period of
three months. Then children would be ready to invent journeys across the
Habsburg lands, imagining their routes and calculating the distances traversed.13 Maps like these formed a new set of tools for rethinking the idea of
Austria, the relations among its parts, and its place in the world.

I m p e r i a l S pa c e
What nineteenth-century justifications of Austria-Hungary shared was a concern with the empire as a spatial unit. The economic argument associated with
Minister von Bruck, for instance, was at heart about geography. Von Bruck
stressed that trade would be enlivened by the “geographical relations” of the
Habsburg lands: “The geographical relations between the Austrian crownlands and the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venice are such that all products that
are imported and duty paid in one part of the Monarchy will, with very few
exceptions, be consumed in the other part.”14 Analogously, arguments for the
military necessity of Habsburg unity took a more broadly geographic perspective from the 1850s, incorporating new evidence about the medical consequences of travel, as we will see below. Likewise, cultural justifications of
the multinational state were increasingly cast as maps or surveys, charting the
distribution in space of factors like language use or architectural artifacts.15
What was emerging, then, was not a static “Idea,” but a dynamic program
for the empirical investigation of the Monarchy’s resources and “geographical
relations.” To this end von Bruck quickly brought Vienna’s Administrative
Statistics Office under his direction at the ministry of trade, and he recruited
men of science like the physicist Andreas von Baumgartner and the statistician
Karl von Czoernig to work for it. In subsequent chapters, we will see how the
ZAMG took up this agenda upon its founding in 1851, alongside the Imperial
Geological Institute and other scientific bodies of the neo-absolutist era. The
geosciences developed in imperial Austria in the second half of the nineteenth
century as a means of fleshing out a new Austrian Idea by studying the concrete conditions of (economic) unity in (environmental) diversity.

50

Chapter Two

This was a project with significant consequences for the development of the
sciences. Gregor Mendel, for instance, the neglected author of the first mathematical law of biological inheritance, by no means confined his observations to
his monastery garden. As Sander Gliboff has shown, Mendel’s determination
to quantify the organic world developed through his engagement with efforts
to measure and map the natural conditions of plant and animal life throughout the empire— to systematize, in other words, Austria’s celebrated diversity
of flora and fauna.16 “Far richer in geographical contrasts than most of the other
European states,” wrote Austria’s premier geographer Albrecht Penck in 1906,
“[Austria] beckons above all for the study of its own land. . . . The wealth of
contrasts of all kinds makes Austria an observing field for geographers which
is virtually unmatched in Europe.”17 The university in Vienna was supremely
situated for such studies, sitting as it did at the confluence of hills and plains and
in easy reach of the Alps. This feast of new phenomena nourished geography’s
natural-scientific turn in the late nineteenth century. “Without doubt there lies in
the diversity of its land and people a good portion of Austria’s charm,” wrote the
Vienna geographer Norbert Krebs. “And the way in which various natural and
social phenomena interact strongly excites the interest of the educated person.”18
Through these persistent reminders of Austria’s natural as well as cultural
diversity, Vienna’s field scientists underlined the empire’s status as a laboratory. That the Austro-Hungarian Dual Monarchy was an “experiment” has
been a refrain equally common among the empire’s inhabitants and its historians, its admirers and its critics. In 1897, for instance, the Austro-Marxist leader
Victor Adler called the empire the “laboratory of world history”; the dissident
Hungarian historian Oszkar Jaszi used the same concept to describe the moribund empire in retrospect. The antiliberal satirist Karl Kraus agreed that the
Habsburg capital Vienna was a laboratory, namely, an “experimental station
for the end of the world.” Even what arose in the empire’s wake was hailed by
the Czech leader Tomaš Masaryk as “a laboratory atop a graveyard.”19 The
history of the field sciences in imperial Austria helps us appreciate the depth
of this metaphor. This democratizing multinational empire was an experiment
not only in a political sense. It was also a laboratory for the investigation of the
nexus between nature and society, for probing the putative phenomenon of
empire itself: a unity grounded in diversity, both human and environmental.

M o n u m e n t s o f N a t u r e a n d C u lt u r e
In this respect, the natural sciences were developing in parallel to the human
sciences. In linguistics, ethnography, architecture, and art history, and beyond,

The Austrian Idea

51

researchers were likewise setting out to document the Monarchy’s cultural
multiplicity.20 Commonalities among these projects were overdetermined by
their institutional histories, shared personnel, and mutual methodological influence. Von Czoernig, for instance, the director of the Vienna Administrative
Statistical Office, oversaw projects on ethnography, art history, and climatology.
Von Bruck also directed the commission charged with preserving Austria’s
art historical monuments, which later took responsibility for “natural monuments” as well. These projects shared a common grounding in the “positive”
methods of natural history. Art historians, for instance, now insisted on the
direct observation of original works of art, not copies. And they valued these
objects not merely as things of beauty but as clues to an evolutionary process.21
More importantly, these projects shared a politics. They rested, first, on the
principle that no cultural or linguistic tradition was too minor to merit scholarly attention. As Crown Prince Rudolf insisted, “none of the crown lands of
Austria-Hungary should be regarded as unworthy of a loving, detailed depiction.”22 What the Czech statesman Masaryk called “small, detailed, mundane
work” was thus as much a principle of scientific practice in the Habsburg lands
as it was a tenet of the political philosophy of nationalism.23
What’s more, these imperial surveys all foregrounded phenomena of mixing and exchange. In ethnography, for instance, the seminal three-volume survey by Karl von Czoernig charted a history of migrations across the Habsburg
lands in order to demonstrate that the ethnic diversity of the Monarchy
reached down to such minute dimensions that no division of the territory
along national lines was conceivable.24 Simultaneously, the Vienna School of
Art History challenged the naïveté of many Romantic-nationalist celebrations
of folk art by uncovering the historical hybridity of folk traditions.25 Against
nationalists who urged a return to “authentic” folk art, Alois Riegl insisted
that folk art tended to be imitative of wider, cosmopolitan trends. The preservationist efforts of the midcentury Vienna School of Art History focused on
the cosmopolitan dimensions of “Austrian” art, above all works of the Renaissance and Baroque eras. Thus their conclusions were prescriptive as well as
descriptive: as von Eitelberger argued in 1870, “the progress of contemporary
civilization rests precisely on the exchange of ideas among the most varied
peoples.”26 Riegl later stressed the same point: “On the occasion when the
unfamiliar meets the unfamiliar in a close and sustained relationship, the process of development is set in motion.”27 In this way, in an era when nationalism
was reconceiving historical research as a quest for authenticity and indigeneity,
a largely forgotten project emerged across the human and natural sciences to
focus attention instead on the complexity of cultural flows.28

52

Chapter Two

From the start, this research was intended for immediate public consumption. Indeed, as the art historian Rudolf von Eitelberger made clear in the
1850s, it was meant to teach the public a new way of seeing, a gaze that would
transcend divides of class and nation. Thus “whole-state” ( gesammtstaatlich)
research in the human sciences resulted in a host of cultural productions, from
atlases to exhibits to memorials, all of which conditioned a new way of regarding a landscape. Alois Riegl termed it a “view from a distance.” It was a vision
of the environment as an aesthetic composition, rather than as the setting for
the daily struggle for survival. Riegl described the subjective effect as a “mood”
or “ambience” (Stimmung). It resembled religious devotion, yet he traced it to
the modern scientific view of a world interlinked by causal relations. It seemed
to Riegl that the public of his day craved nothing so much as this experience
of Stimmung. It offered “the reassuring conviction of the unshakeable rule
of the law of causality.”29 It was a quest for redemption through art and the
natural world.
For Riegl’s successor as director of the monument’s commission, Max
Dvorak, this striving for a synthetic overview in the sciences was part of a
broader transformation in the relationship between man and nature. Modern man had learned to take aesthetic pleasure in nature. His gaze took
in “the diversity of natural phenomena . . . so that the full richness of the
world down to the smallest wildflower and the most fleeting change in
the atmosphere and quality of light has become a source of artistic sensations.”30 As we will see, this goal of appreciating nature’s diversity at multiple scales resonated strongly with Habsburg scientists and cartographers.
In the 1890s, the monument-preservation movement also embraced the protection of “natural monuments,” landscapes of particular scientific, aesthetic,
or cultural value.31 Between 1903 and 1906, the imperial education ministry, in
conjunction with the crown land administrations, oversaw the production of
an inventory of Austria’s “natural monuments.” Although proposed laws for
the protection of natural monuments failed to win parliamentary support, the
Zoological-Botanical Society continued to revise and expand the inventory of
worthy sites in all the crown lands through the First World War.32 Austria’s
nature-protection movement merits further research as a counterpoint to the
nationalist framework within which nature protection was pursued elsewhere.
Unusually for this era, Habsburg citizens were being urged to take responsibility for landscapes that were not part of their own national heritage.
Riegl’s concept of Stimmung helped to explain how certain landscapes acquired a more-than-local value. Writing in the 1890s as director of the empire’s
monument-preservation commission, Riegl argued that the public had come

The Austrian Idea

53

to appreciate architectural remains due to what he termed their “age value.”
Like Stimmung, age value was linked to a view from afar, now in both the temporal and spatial sense. Just as the effect of Stimmung arose from an awareness
of causal connections in space, age value corresponded to a vision of the cycle
of universal birth and decay. Both Stimmung and age value indexed the subjective experience of recognizing that a particular object was causally related to a
more general geographic and historical context. These concepts did important
political work. Riegl argued that the monument commission should prioritize
“age value” precisely because it stood above national differences. “While the
feeling of pride of an Austrian, or of a Bohemian, a Styrian, a Carinthian, etc.,
or of a German, a Czech, a Pole, etc., regarding the monuments of the state
or of a land or of a nationality always rests on isolation from others, whether
foreigners or inhabitants of another crown land or members of another nationality, the feeling of age value is based on a sense of belonging to the entire
world.”33 In order to affect a viewer, a monument did not need to speak to his
or her personal or ethnic history. Anyone could experience the aesthetic pull
of age value, simply by taking up the “gaze from afar,” which Riegl associated
with experiences of travel around the empire. Thus “the Bohemian searches
to satisfy his deep longing for mood in something like a cathedral in Dalmatia,
while a person from Styria finds it in Tyrolean wall painting, and the person
from Silesia finds it in Salzburg’s Italianate architecture.”34
The twin preservationist projects, artistic and environmental, also faced a
similar quandary. On what basis should the significance of a monument be assessed? Dvorak argued that art historians had often exaggerated the historical
value of some objects at the expense of others, because their frames of reference were overly general. Reliance on nature’s own scale of value would right
this imbalance, he suggested. The gaze fit to judge the need for preservation
was that of the “nature lover,” who had “learned to appreciate the monument
holistically [in ihrer Gesamterscheinung] as a part of a landscape and as an element of nature’s beauty in the broadest sense.” Judgments of historical value
originated with “this love of nature, which is expressed when man bows in
admiration before what nature has created to be the measure of all things [was
die Natur als Maß der Dinge geschaffen hat].”35 As a counterweight against
universalist norms, the art historian would evaluate the aesthetic qualities of
a monument in situ, as part of its milieu. He would let nature instruct him in
the appropriate aesthetic response to a particular natural-cultural landscape.36
Thus the imperial-royal art historian grounded his authority in his ability to
judge the significance of monuments according to nature’s own scale.
In short, the imperial-royal sciences were cultivating a new way of regard-

54

Chapter Two

ing the environment. Riegl’s concepts of ambience and age value should thus
be understood as the theorization of a gaze that was cultivated jointly by the
natural and human sciences under the patronage of the Habsburg state in the
wake of 1848. This was a spatially and temporally “distant” view of cultural
landscapes, yet one attentive to local detail.

The Virtues of Diversity
In the remainder of this chapter, we will begin to consider how this gaze constructed the natural diversity of the Habsburg Empire. That is, we will see how
justifications of Habsburg power in the neo-absolutist era of the 1850s invoked
Austria’s great variety of physical environments in order to naturalize the phenomenon of the supranational state. Theories of the natural world informed
arguments for transnational interdependence.
Von Bruck’s claims for the economic benefits of Habsburg unity, for example, presumed a new form of knowledge about this state: a comprehensive
overview of its material conditions. In 1850, this was more agenda than reality.
The empirical investigation of the empire’s natural and human resources was
largely the work of the next half century. But the possibility of achieving such
knowledge was the foundation on which von Bruck’s argument rested. In line
with Austrian critiques of German idealism, von Bruck cast political economy
as a materialist and empiricist form of knowledge. In terms that foreshadow
the subsequent Methodenstreit between marginalist and historicist economists,
von Bruck quoted his close colleague Ernst von Schwarzer: “Freedom can be
thought absolutely only in spiritual matters; however, matter is tied to a particular space as form. Economics is a practical and empirical science.”37 As an
empirical science, economics had more in common with natural history than
celestial mechanics. Von Bruck stressed the organic as opposed to mechanical character of the economic relations of central Europe, resting as they did
on a “natural law of development.”38 The existing economic fragmentation of
central Europe was “not natural,” and the longer these “unnatural” conditions
were allowed to persist, the more difficult it would be to effect the cure.39 Von
Bruck thus portrayed Austria as an “organism,” whose strength rested on the
healthy interdependence of its parts: on “this economic (continental and maritime) complementarity and mutual completion.”40
In this vision, the heterogeneity of economic conditions in central Europe
would catalyze trade, promoting economic and thus political unity. “For this
reason the current of trade must flow freely from the north German ports to
Triest, from the Mediterranean to the Danish Straits, from the Rhine to the

The Austrian Idea

55

lower Danube or in reverse.”41 As a publication of the ministry of trade put it
in 1850: “Only by virtue of this vast territory, united even its diversity, bordering three seas, will it be possible to reconcile the economic differences and to
develop the rich and varied treasures of its earth and soil and its advantageous
locations into lively trade and industrial productivity.”42 Commercial freedom
would ensure that “the continental and the maritime” would “complement
and complete” each other. In von Bruck’s imagery, the territory of the Monarchy was reimagined as a space of flows, a circulation of commodities, laborers,
and capital.
This geographical vision did not stop at the Monarchy’s borders. Rather
than aiming for total autarky, von Bruck proposed to replace Josephinist prohibitions on imports with protective tariffs. This would serve to nurture nascent
industrial and agricultural enterprises, while allowing central Europe to take its
rightful place within international trade and thus international politics (Weltpolitik). Geography dictated in particular lively commerce between Austria
and “Turkey,” meaning both current and former Ottoman lands. Thanks to
the Habsburg railway network and its Adriatic ports, the “powerful artery of
European trade runs straight through Austria.”43
Commentators at the time heard in this an echo of the old idea of Austria as
the mediator between West and East. What was new, in their judgment, was to
find “this belief so well framed and substantiated from the crucial materialist
perspective.” Economic geography was reinvigorating the old idea of Austria
as “a cultural intermediary between the Orient and the Occident.” Austria
knew itself “to be the center and support of Europe”; it “repelled” some flows
while “fulfilling” others. “The role of intermediary is natural to it, not only
because it shelters and connects members of all the European nations in its
embrace, but also because of the diversity of its lands and waters.” The empire’s
waterways brought northern Europe, the Adriatic and Mediterranean, Poland
and Russia all into Austria’s “immediate economic sphere.” “Thus Austria,
a land of the most abundant diversity and economic plenty in its own right,
represents likewise the central state that interconnects Europe’s peoples and
countries.”44 In this vision, the physical diversity of the Habsburg state, its
environmental contrasts, were understood to create complementary markets
and thus to catalyze trade. Commercial relations were reimagined as the metabolic system of the imperial organism. In the tradition of cameralism and of
Linnaeus’s equation between nature and nation, this justification of empire
posited the human polity as a manifestation of nature’s own economy.
In retrospect, however, the remarkable thing about von Bruck’s proposal
was his characterization of central Europe as uniform in climate. When he

56

Chapter Two

spoke of Austria’s geographical variety, he meant its access to varied markets
and routes, not a variety of regional climates. In that respect, the Habsburgs’
dominions could not compare to the overseas empires of other European
states, with their contrasts between “temperate” and “tropical” climes. And
yet it was at this time that others were beginning to look more closely at conditions of climate and soil across this territory.
They discovered variations where von Bruck had seen uniformity. In the
1850s, the liberal Bohemian writer and statesman Ferdinand Stamm was looking into the role of climate and geology in Bohemia’s agricultural and industrial development.45 In an 1855 article for the liberal Viennese daily Die Presse,
Stamm argued that Austria’s climatic diversity was the key to its future economic self-sufficiency. Of the nine plants whose seeds could be counted on for
sustenance, only three played the role of “daily bread” in any human society,
and each of those was associated with one of the earth’s climatic zones: “rice
for the hot, wheat for the temperate, and rye for the north and the mountains.”
“You, lucky Austria, on your far-reaching land, grow the three most important
plants and all the others mentioned!” Its varied regions could supplement
each other’s production in times of need. “There are no dry years and no wet
years that could frighten . . . a land of Austria’s breadth, stretching across two
opposing climates.” All that was needed was a suitable transportation network.
“When this empire has drawn the veins of its rivers, its railway network and
the finer mesh of its roads through its entire body . . . then its . . . inhabitants
will be removed from the sphere of famine.” In this sense, diversity was insurance against the variability of nature. Stamm appealed to a mental map of
the territory’s disparate yet interdependent environments. The Alps, for instance, served as a windbreak and as dry land during floods, while the melting
snows on its peaks irrigated fields far and wide. “Austria never stands under
one storm, never under one wind, never under the same blazing sky. . . . In
the diversity of its climate and its soil conditions, Austria has its own compensation in the event of misfortune; it does not need other states.” In short,
“Austria is called a great power, because it has over 12,000 square miles; yet
there are states with more land that are not great powers. Austria is indeed
a great power, however, because its eagle stretches its wings into tepid and
into warm air: diversity makes Austria great.”46 This argument would find
tragic confirmation during the Great War, when the Monarchy’s internal trade
network collapsed and Vienna came close to starvation.47 Until then, this economic interpretation of Austria’s physical diversity would prove an important
stimulus to the geological, botanical, medical, and climatological survey of
its territory.

The Austrian Idea

57

A M i n i at u r e “ W o r l d S y st e m ”
The decade after 1848 saw “Austria’s re-creation,” in the words of the statistician and naturalist Karl von Czoernig.48 He was referring to the new rail lines,
roads, canals, stone bridges, and telegraph wires that had bound the regions
of the Monarchy more closely together. It was also in this period that a centralized banking network developed, while internal tariffs and restrictions on
labor migration were lifted. Lively trade developed between the industrialized
west and agricultural east, fueling growth in ways that began to even out regional economic disparities.49 The economic historian Andrea Komlosy has
recently argued that modernization theorists have been wrong to view AustriaHungary as a periphery within the economic “world system.” Rather, the
Habsburg Monarchy was a miniature world system in its own right.50 Komlosy
insists that the heterogeneity of the Habsburg Monarchy was not its fatal flaw,
but rather the source of its now well-documented economic dynamism. This
was precisely how Habsburg subjects themselves perceived their situation.
Indeed, they were explicitly taught to see things this way, as we can see from
later school texts. For instance, the 1910 Österreichische Vaterlandskunde for
upper-grade elementary-school students, under the heading of “The Natural
Endowment of the Monarchy,” instructed that Austria-Hungary came closer
than most other European states to the “ideal of a self-sufficient economic existence.” Its capacity to meet its inhabitants’ needs for agricultural and industrial
products rested on its natural diversity. “The regions variously endowed by
geography, climate, and soil also lend the most varied branches of economic
production the most favorable conditions. Facilitated by natural avenues for
trade, the exchange of its unique products has called forth an internal commerce that has also pressed powerfully outward in the last decade and successfully sought entry to international trade.”51
Not everyone was so sanguine, however. As rail tracks lengthened and the
Danube was regulated for travel by steamship, public debate turned to the
question of how these improvements in transportation would affect the distribution of production. Would these changes invigorate the economic life of
the empire as a whole, or would they magnify regional economic inequalities?
Was the new vision of ecological/economic interdependence anything more
than an excuse for perpetuating existing inequities? Following the lifting of
internal tariffs in 1851, the price of grain rose in regions where it was grown for
sale elsewhere in the Monarchy, just as many in western Austria had feared it
would. Meanwhile, many Hungarians worried that they were entering a relationship of colonial dependency with respect to Austria.

58

Chapter Two

Whether they were right is a question that continued to exercise economic
historians long after the empire’s fall. A consensus has emerged that the
post-1851 economic relationship between Austria and Hungary worked to the
benefit of both. Hungary seems to have been no worse off in this arrangement
than the American South after the US Civil War.52 Circa 1851, liberals argued
against their critics that further improvements in agriculture and transportation would make the system work to the benefit of all. Achieving a more
expansive market would make it possible to “balance out [ausgleichen] heterogeneous interests,” such as those of the Monarchy’s more agricultural east
and more industrialized west. This contrast was rooted in contrasting natural
conditions: the “virgin soil” of Hungary, on one hand, and the “harsh climate”
of western Austria, on the other. What was needed, then, was a “rational”
agriculture, one that matched each local “soil and climate” to an appropriate
crop or manufacturing enterprise. Somewhat improbably, this anonymous
author recommended turning Hungary’s fields over to export crops like tobacco, wool, wine, and silk, while allowing Austria to become the “natural
granary” of the German states of Bavaria, Saxony, and Silesia.53 Other observers worried that the pursuit of autarky would lead Austria down the path of
imperial Russia, where production tended to be specialized by region. They
too emphasized that Austria displayed a historical tendency toward economic
diversity that mirrored the heterogeneity of the natural world. Those regions
that were most successful economically displayed “the most diverse industries
alongside each other . . . just as the fields that yield the most abundant harvests
are those on which the most diverse flowers spread their seeds.”54 Even among
Italian nationalists in the spring of 1848, one could find leaders who clung to
von Bruck’s conception of central Europe as a zone bound together by its
natural and human diversity. As the Italian version of the Lloyd proclaimed in
the spring of 1848, the “natural conditions” of Trieste dictated “trade between
the sea which sits in front of it and the continental lands to its back.”55 One
could only conclude that division of this territory along national lines would
be unnatural.

T h e N at u r a l i z e d E co n o m y
In the course of the nineteenth century, economic life seemed to be freeing itself
from the control of nature. A host of technological improvements— including
new means of fertilization, transport, refrigeration, and power generation and
transmission— promised to liberate the geography of production from the
distribution of natural resources. Thus Marx foresaw that capital, not land or

The Austrian Idea

59

labor, would be the decisive spatial factor in the future. With the rise of marginal economics, value became a subjective category, apparently independent
of physical constraints. The historian Margaret Schabas argues that neoclassical economics “took man out of nature. The economy was seen to be the result
of rational agency and, thus, no longer directly governed by natural forces.”56
The “Austrian School” of economics is usually considered to have been at
the vanguard of this subjectivist turn. Indeed, in Carl Menger’s seminal Principles of Economics of 1871, we read that “land occupies no exceptional place
among goods.” A farmer renting a plot of land for a limited span of time need
not concern himself with the land’s history, with the origins of its fertility. “A
buyer of a piece of land attempts to reckon the ‘future’ but never the ‘past’ of
the land he is purchasing.”57 Nonetheless, Menger himself did reckon with the
past. In his contribution to the Kronprinzenwerk, he narrated an environmental history of Bohemia, attributing the desiccation of its climate to population
growth and associated drainage and deforestation.58 In certain cases, then,
Menger did take natural limits into account.59
More importantly, Menger’s subjectivism never represented the mainstream of Habsburg economic thought. The misleading label of the “Austrian
School” was affixed to him and his two major followers by his opponent Gustav Schmoller, for whom “Austrian” was a term of derision akin to “provincial.”
In fact, one-quarter of the membership of the historical economists’ Verein
fur Sozialpolitik was Austrian by the 1890s.60 Perhaps a more representative
example of late nineteenth-century economic thought in Austria was the textbook Foundations of Political Economy, which went through fourteen editions
between 1893 and 1922. Its author was Eugen von Philippovich, professor of
political economy at the University of Vienna from 1893 to 1917. Although he
had studied with Menger, Philippovich insisted that even under industrial
capitalism, the economy remained bound by natural conditions. He continued
to employ the cameralistic concept of the naturlicher Standort or “natural
location” of production, and to emphasize the economic significance of the
environmental variability of the European continent:
Yet agricultural production, founded on natural characteristics, that is, on the
presence of renewable materials in the soil, demonstrates a dependence on Nature’s influences, which cannot be equalized by the investment of capital and
labor, which the land cannot elude due to its spatial fixity, and which eludes
human calculation as to the quantitative and qualitative result of production.
Insufficient investment of capital, inadequate labor, can certainly reduce the
yield of a land favored by Nature, while generous capital investment and

60

Chapter Two

persistent work can increase the return; but they cannot cancel out the natural
differences and eliminate completely the influence of Nature.61

This persistent tradition of natural historical reasoning in imperial Austria
had at least three sources: explicit resistance to British economic liberalism;
the lingering influence of cameralism, which had integrated political economy
with agricultural science and forestry; and the prevalence of non-Darwinian
evolutionary theories that attributed transformative, heritable effects to climatic conditions.62 As the Ljubljana-based geographer Franz Heiderich put it
in 1910, “Climate is one of the most powerful, indeed in many ways the decisive
factor for organic life in general, as for the human economy in particular.”63
That same year, Heiderich gave the opening speech at the fourth International Economics Workshop, a continuing education program where entrepreneurs and economists acquired knowledge of foreign lands and languages through on-site instruction. The 1910 workshop was held in Vienna,
and Heiderich introduced it with a lecture titled “The Natural Conditions
of Economic Life in Austria-Hungary,” in which he began by insisting that
economic life was “rooted” in the “geographical milieu.” He was followed
by Josef Stoiser, an expert on commercial geography at the University of Vienna, who gave a whole series of lectures on the various natural regions of
the Monarchy.64 Scholars like Heiderich and Stoiser had no use for a strictly
subjective theory of value. Yet they were also bent on showing that classical
economists had been wrong to assume that the fit between climate and mode of
production was self-evident. On the contrary, it would now become the work
of climatologists, geographers, and political economists to characterize each
region’s climate, and to deduce its place in the emerging “world economy.”

Imperial Bodies
What we might term the ecological justification for Habsburg unity was supported not only by research into the state’s varied physical environments, but
also by new understandings of the human body’s relationship to its surroundings. Germ theories of disease became dominant in the late nineteenth century,
but they never fully displaced medical attention to “airs, waters, and places.”
Throughout the nineteenth century, projects of colonization were understood
to stand or fall according to the success with which settlers were “seasoned”
to the new environment. Even as germ theories gained ground, colonial physicians conducted ever more detailed investigations into the environmental
determinants of health and disease.65 This was also true in imperial Austria.

The Austrian Idea

61

Before the rise of germ theories in the 1870s, military and medical experts
often blamed the poor health of soldiers in the imperial army— and thus
Austria’s military defeats of 1859 and 1866— on unhealthy environments.66
They raised alarm, for instance, over conditions in Croatia, where soldiers
were housed in overcrowded, poorly ventilated, and yet permeable dwellings
that offered insufficient protection from the elements, including the fierce bora
wind. Similarly, they recommended regulation of the Sava and Drava Rivers
in order to remove the stagnant waters responsible for malaria.67 More generally, they cited the experience of “climate variation” (Klimawechsel) as a
threat to the Habsburg soldier’s body. This claim found support in ancient
medical wisdom holding that “variable” climates were less healthy than stable
ones.68 Environmental health remained a military concern even after the rise
of bacteriology— and despite the army’s decision in the 1880s to allow soldiers
to be stationed in their home regions. Indeed, the first of fourteen volumes of
The Hygienic Conditions of the Locations of the Larger Garrisons of the AustroHungarian Monarchy appeared in 1888.
Meanwhile, physicians began to reconsider the effects of “climate variation.” In 1856 the Imperial-Royal Society of Physicians formed a Balneological
Committee with the aim of producing a comprehensive survey of the Monarchy’s health resorts or Kurorte. The committee appealed for assistance to “every friend of the fatherland, of natural science, and of ailing humanity.” They
solicited an exhaustive description of the climatological and medical properties of each locale— remarkably, even those whose curative properties were
“questionable or even entirely insignificant.”69 Meanwhile, the newly founded
ZAMG supplied health resorts throughout the empire with the instruments
necessary to monitor local climatic conditions. “Climatotherapy” eventually
came to be defined as “the study of the application of the varied climatic influences to therapeutic purposes,” with an emphasis on variation.70 This gave
a strong boost to Austria’s tourism industry, part of a development that Alison
Frank Johnson has aptly termed the commodification of air.71 At stake for
Austria was the promotion of destinations ranging from the traditional spas of
western Bohemia and Hungary, to the lakeside retreats of the Austrian Alps. By
the end of the nineteenth century, this medical marketplace also included the
so-called Austrian Riviera in Istria and Dalmatia and the high-altitude resorts
of the Tatra Mountains and other regions of the Carpathians. The Habsburg
economy depended increasingly on the appeal of spa and resort destinations
that drew urban dwellers and the infirm to sunshine, snow, dry air, or ocean
breezes. Climatic contrasts thus encouraged the economically vital circulation
of people as well as goods.

62

Chapter Two

Indeed, it was in this period that travelers through the Habsburg lands began to appreciate landscapes that had until then been described as wasteland.
These included the craggy, arid karst lands and the grassy plains of Hungary.
Adalbert Stifter described this shift in his story “Two Sisters,” which revolves
around characters who dedicate themselves to living off the hardscrabble highlands of South Tyrol. The narrator, accustomed to the fertile soil of his Bohemian home, had “no other concept of the beauty of a landscape. . . . Yet here
I stood in a wasteland [Oede], where everything was wanting . . . and where
nonetheless there appeared such a peaceful beauty that it seemed nature had
laid a simple, sublime, epic poem before me.”72

Conclusion
What emerged in the aftermath of 1848 was less a new Austrian Idea than a new
way of looking at and experiencing the Austrian territory. In 1850, Minister von
Bruck could still describe the climate of central Europe as relatively uniform.
By the 1870s, the climatic diversity of Austria-Hungary was celebrated by men
of science and statecraft alike. Diversity became visible because it became valued. Research across the natural and human sciences revealed minute variations of climate, soil, language, and culture, as well as resulting patterns of flow
and exchange. The result was a new way to think the idea of Austria— not as
a lofty abstraction, nor as a homogeneous national community, but rather as a
physical space of circulation.

Chapter 3

The Imperial-Royal Scientist

“The Austrian Empire appears destined above all to become the most instructive school for meteorological and climatological relations. . . . Here an oceanic
climate joins hands with a continental one. With such varied atmospheric conditions in coastal and interior regions, on alpine peaks and in valleys, there is
nowhere better to study and grasp the interactions among them.”1 The year
was 1852, the occasion a special meeting of the Vienna Academy of Sciences to
mark the founding of the ZAMG, and the speaker was Karl Kreil, the institute’s
founding director (figure 7). Kreil had grown up in the hills of Upper Austria,
where his father had risen from the peasantry to a low-level administrative
position for the imperial education ministry. Young Kreil was fortunate to win
free entry to a gymnasium where, unusually for the era, the natural sciences
were emphasized. Subsequently, as an assistant at observatories in Milan and
Göttingen, Kreil learned of the enterprise conceived by the famed explorer
Humboldt and the astronomer Carl Friedrich Gauss: a network of precision
instruments recording every variation of the atmosphere and geomagnetic
field, at every moment, everywhere on the surface of the earth. It was Kreil’s
dream to bring this project to Austria, with its sprawling territory waiting to
be charted with precision.2 In Vienna’s fledgling Academy of Sciences, Kreil
found the support he needed.
The geographical image that Kreil evoked for the academy that day was a
novel one. Until recently, there had been no accurate maps of the territory of
the Habsburg Monarchy as a whole. Kreil himself had been the first scientist
to conceive of— and then conduct— a geophysical survey of the entirety of the
Habsburg realm. For a learned man to venture onto the Hungarian steppe,

64

Chapter Three

F i g u r e 7 . Karl Kreil (1798– 1862). Lithograph by L. Berka, 1849.

the Dalmatian karst, or even the high peaks of the Alps was a highly unusual
enterprise. Now, with the founding of the Academy of Sciences, the ZAMG,
the Imperial Geological Institute, and the Zoological-Botanical Society, a new
generation of scientists would come to identify as experts on the nature of this
space as a whole.
In this way, a new professional identity was born, that of the imperial-royal
scientist. It has long been said that Habsburg civil servants were the keepers
of the “Austrian Idea.” This chapter asks why natural scientists invested in the
idea of “unity in diversity” and with what consequences for Austrian history
and the history of science.

Arbiters of Large and Small
This book argues that the imperial-royal scientist built his public authority
on a capacity to set local details in appropriate relation to a synthetic overview, to attend to minutiae without losing sight of the coherence of the whole.

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 65

It was this ability to judge rightly the significance of small things that gave
the Habsburg field sciences their political resonance in the decades following
the revolutions of 1848. In the next decade, the imperial-royal scientist attained mythic status in the fiction of Adalbert Stifter. Stifter is to Austria what
Goethe is to Germany or Pushkin to Russia. A passionate amateur naturalist
who had once aspired to an academic career in physics, Stifter strove to convey
to readers of his novels and stories the nobility and aesthetic sensitivity of the
man of science. He emphasized in particular the naturalist’s capacity to assess
phenomena according to a more enduring scale than personal inclination. In
Der Nachsommer (Indian Summer), his most famous novel, the education of
the protagonist can be measured by a shift in his perception of scale. The
story centers on the friendship between a budding naturalist, said to have
been modeled on the geologist and climatologist Friedrich Simony, and a wise
older man, who bears more than a passing resemblance to the Vienna physicist Andreas von Baumgartner. From the older man, the younger learns such
principles of art and science as how to paint en plein air and how to predict
a storm. The key is attention to signs both large and small, both “coarse” and
“delicate,” both “in the immediate area in which one finds oneself ” and across
“a wider one.”3 Later in the novel, the narrator thanks his mentor for these
lessons, which have succeeded in reversing his own sense of scale: “the large
is small to me, and the small is large.”4
Austria’s new expert-lay scientific associations of the 1850s and 1860s were
also developing a language with which to articulate this ethos. Consider, for
instance, the words with which the botanist Eduard Fenzl opened a meeting
of the Zoological-Botanical Society in Vienna in 1852, one year after the association’s founding:
What is needed therefore is the sober-minded, harmonious collaboration
of all, as before; manly trust in one’s own powers, free of faint-hearted selfdoubt as of haughty overconfidence; the courage to appear in public and
to engage in scientific debates; the adherence to the greater truth, which is
formed by the appropriate combination of smaller ones into a larger whole,
and which can only serve the substantive goals of the Society by means of
the subordination of all selfish special purposes to the unique authority of
science. This is the only lever that is needed, I tell you, to accomplish what
the Fatherland is justified in expecting from our labors. It all lies in your
hands, and will not escape them, gentlemen, as long as you maintain this one
thing steadfastly: an interest in the smallest thing that each of us produces,
even if the subject lies far from your proclivities, training, and understanding.

66

Chapter Three

Our plenary meetings must remain the vital cement of this mutual fusion of
interests.5

Fenzl’s words exemplify a way of speaking characteristic of the imperial-royal
scientist. This rhetoric contrasted apparent and actual size, the naive and the
expert view. In the wake of revolution, this was an explicitly political lesson.
Narrow-minded attachments to petty pursuits would have to be set aside in the
interest of collaboration. But what was “small” was not necessarily petty. What
appeared small to one researcher might loom large for another, and might well
prove essential to an understanding of nature as a whole. To serve Habsburg
science one had to judge rightly the significance of “small” things.
This chapter considers how one became an imperial-royal scientist by
learning to transcend the localness and particularity of one’s origins. It is important to keep in mind that this perspective was not granted to all who served
Habsburg science. In later chapters we will encounter remarkable individuals
like the Bohemian botanist Emanuel Purkyne, the Galician meteorologist Max
Margules, and the Anglo-German-Czech geographer Julie Moscheles— just
a few of the creative minds who were sentenced to remain “provincial” naturalists, because they were marked by nationality, religion, or gender (or a
combination thereof ). Let us begin, then, with the particular places within
the Habsburg Monarchy that offered a privileged vantage point for studying
the earth as a whole.

Producing the Local
Today’s knowledge of the climatic history of central Europe rests in part on continuous instrumental climate records that begin in the middle of the eighteenth
century at three locations within the Habsburg lands. One is Prague, where
meteorological observations were initiated in 1752 at the baroque astronomical
tower of the Jesuit college, the Clementinum. Another is the Benedictine abbey
of Kremsmunster, near Linz in Upper Austria, where the monks kept meteorological records from 1763. Meteorological observations were also made in
Milan from the 1760s, but the intellectual ties between Lombardy and the rest
of the Monarchy were never close, and by 1859 it had been pried free of the
dynasty’s grasp. Prague and Kremsmunster are thus central to our story. Many
of the leaders of climatological research in imperial Austria owed their careers
to one or the other locale. Each center conceived of its research program as
part of a distinctive local culture, tied to a specific natural and cultural environment, and yet each positioned itself as a window onto the atmosphere at large.

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 67

Kremsmunster
Bordering Bavaria to the west and Bohemia to the north, with the Danube
Valley to its east and the peaks of Styria to its south, Upper Austria was a land
of green hills and alpine lakes. Its wealth rested on the salt mines of the region
around Salzburg, as well as areas of coal and iron mining. The high-altitude
pastures lent themselves to traditional methods of farming, cattle raising, and
fruit orchards. The region was also shaped by a violent religious history, as
a major theater in the wars of the Counter-Reformation. By the eighteenth
century, Protestantism had been defeated, and influential monastic orders had
taken up residence. Their baroque monasteries still adorn the landscape of
Upper Austria today.
The two men who contributed most to the institutionalization of climatology in the Habsburg Monarchy were both natives of Upper Austria: Karl
Kreil and Julius Hann. What’s more, both were graduates of the gymnasium
run by the monks at Kremsmunster (see plate 1). Kreil completed his studies
there in 1819 and Hann in 1860. By a further coincidence, both attended the
school as scholarship students, coming from families of little means. Moreover, Kremsmunster also educated Adalbert Stifter, the man responsible for
embedding the earth sciences in Austria’s literary canon. Another pivotal figure for climatology, Josef Roman Lorenz von Liburnau (1825– 1911), attended
gymnasium in nearby Linz, where the teaching of the natural sciences reflected
the abbey’s influence.
A recent study concludes that the Benedictines “produced more Catholic
Enlighteners than any other order” in the eighteenth century.6 One reason
for this was the willingness of Benedictine monks to engage with elements of
Protestant thought. The writings of the early eighteenth-century rationalist
philosopher Christian Wolff, for instance, were eagerly discussed at Kremsmunster. So it is not entirely surprising to find that the natural sciences at
Kremsmunster were inspired by a “physico-theology” more often associated
with Protestantism. The essence of physico-theology as it flourished among
eighteenth-century writers in German was the effort to observe the wisdom
of creation in nature’s most mundane and often miniscule objects. At Kremsmunster, religious feeling motivated a highly disciplined regime of scientific
observation.7
The abbey’s astronomical observatory or “mathematical tower,” as it was
popularly known, was constructed between 1748 and 1758. Its collection
of state-of-the-art scientific instruments was unrivaled in central Europe,
thanks in large part to the efforts of Kreil’s mentor, the astronomer Bonifazius

68

Chapter Three

Schwarzenbrunner. It is said that Schwarzenbrunner was so single-mindedly
driven to improve the instrument collection that he drove himself mad and
died at the age of forty— but not before convincing the emperor to supply the
finest clock, theodolite, and equatorial telescope.8 In Hann’s student days, the
meteorological instruments included a thermometer, a barometer, a psychrometer and hygrometer for measuring humidity, and an instrument for measuring
the ozone content of the atmosphere. Augustin Reslhuber, who was director
of the observatory while Hann was a pupil, insisted that these costly instruments showed their true value because they were not left idle, but were put to
excellent use by the students “for the glorification of the power of the Creator
and the education and ennoblement of humanity.”9 Precision climatology was
thus a spiritual endeavor.
The monks’ dedication to the study of the heavens and atmosphere made
a strong impression on students like Kreil and Hann. Both men were so attached to their teachers and school friends that they often spent holidays at
Kremsmunster after graduating. The science of climate as it took shape in the
1840s and 1850s in Austria owed much to the abbey’s naturalists. In works
like Marian Koller’s 1841 study of the course of temperature in Upper Austria,
or Augustin Reslhuber’s 1854 investigation of the water temperature of the
springs around Kremsmunster, the monks conducted precise surveys of the
limits within which climate varied. Such research helped to construct the “local,” defining the specificity of the environment to which both Kreil and Hann
felt such a strong attachment.10
At the same time, Koller imparted the farsighted lesson that the future of
climatological research would require cooperation on a large scale, following the example set by Humboldt and Gauss for geomagnetism. Already in
1841, before communication by telegraph was even a practical possibility, he
recognized the need for simultaneous observations across the globe. “One
increasingly arrives at the inner conviction that all parts of our planet exist in
perpetual atmospheric communication,” he wrote, “and that the atmospheric
conditions at one point on the earth are just one result of conditions on the
rest of the earth.” Koller envisioned an international project spearheaded by
strong central states: “In this way, the whole becomes complex and the task
difficult, far exceeding the physical and moral force of an individual. Its resolution can only be undertaken by means of united forces, by societies that are
fortunate to rely on the protection and support of powerful authorities.”11 It
would be another decade before Kreil could secure imperial support for such
an undertaking. When he did, Kremsmunster and Linz became two of the
network’s essential nodes.

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 69

F i g u r e 8 . The Prague Clementinum, where regular instrumental meteorological measurements began in 1752.

Prague
As a local environment and as a window onto global phenomena, Kremsmunster was defined primarily in spiritual terms. Prague presents a contrast in this
respect. The Bohemian capital, which nurtured several of the early leaders
of climatology in imperial Austria— including Eduard Suess, Karl Fritsch,
Emanuel Purkyne, and Friedrich Simony— had a more practically oriented
scientific culture. To be sure, enlightened Catholicism flourished in the Bohemian lands as it did in Upper Austria. Karl Fritsch even claimed that he had
been drawn to climatology since his school days because the Prague observatory was associated in his mind with the wisdom and grandeur of God.12 Yet
physico-theology was not as dominant an influence in Prague, and Bohemian
intellectual life in this period tended toward realism, often in explicit defiance
of northern German idealism. This orientation was expressed most famously
in the universalist humanism of the former priest Bernard Bolzano, who inspired subsequent developments in central European analytical philosophy.
More important for climatology was the rise in the late eighteenth century of
a Bohemian patriotism centered on aspirations for economic development.
Bohemia’s Patriotic Economic Society originated under the rule of Maria
Theresa as a voluntary association dedicated to agricultural improvement and

70

Chapter Three

popular enlightenment. In a period when maritime European states were eyeing colonial territory overseas, proponents of development in the Bohemian
lands focused their prospecting on the natural riches of their own territories.
Just as they set out to catalog the distribution of useful plants and minerals,
they also undertook climatological observations for the sake of agriculture and
forestry. From 1796, the Patriotic Economic Society, in conjunction with the
Jesuit observatory in Prague (figure 8), promoted systematic climatological
and later phenological observations. By the end of the 1790s, records were also
kept at six sites in Bohemia beyond Prague.13 Karl Fritsch, for instance, began
his scientific career as the coordinator of meteorological observations for the
Patriotic Economic Society.
These studies of the local natural environment carried symbolic as well
as practical value. The Bohemian patriots insisted that their land formed a
natural unit, such that, as Palacky put it in 1849, “it is not possible to divide
it without destroying it.”14 Given the significance of the natural environment
and its resources to Bohemian patriotism, it may not be a coincidence that
Palacky’s son Jan became a biogeographer, concerned in particular with the
relationship between climate, soil, and plant growth. Adopting his father’s
ambition of modernizing the Czech language, the younger Palacky even invented a Czech word for climatology (vzduchoslovi, literally “aerography”).15
By the same token, one should not be shocked to find the beloved Czech
novelist Bozena Nemcova cited as among “the pioneers of geobotanical studies of our lands.”16 Nemcova penned a series of travel sketches at the request
of the physiologist and patriotic activist J. E. Purkyne for his journal ziva, in
which she highlighted the interdependence of local cultures and their natural
environments.
As was the case at Kremsmunster, these scientific surveys served to define local Bohemian nature and culture, while also establishing Bohemia as
a favorable vantage point onto the natural world at large. The Moravian poet
Hieronymus Lorm (1821– 1902) expressed these twin goals when he termed
patriotic feeling (Heimatsgefuhl) “the most powerful basis for delight in the
natural world,” yet added that what is most wonderful in nature is what can be
observed everywhere.17 In other words, local nature rose in value to the degree
that it revealed something universal. In this vein, the botanical geographers
Emanuel Purkyne and Ladislav celakovsky sorted Bohemian plants not only
for local practical purposes, but also to delineate a more general method for
classifying plants in relation to altitude and climatic conditions. As we have
seen, it was in this spirit of appreciating the more-than-local significance of
particular details that Jan Evangelista Purkyne (Emanuel’s father) introduced

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 71

the inaugural issue of the very first Czech-language scientific journal in 1853,
insisting that “in infinite nature nothing is insignificant, nor are the needs of
man its only measure. The broad, indiscriminate [bezohledny] identification
and comprehension of everything that presents itself to the senses— that is the
task of the natural scientist.”18
Thus the climatological research programs associated with Prague and
Kremsmunster articulated their own reasons for attaching significance to the
local and particular. What’s more, each taught its own ecological lessons. Bohemia, with its gentle hills and dense forests, drew attention above all to the
fine-grained dependence of vegetation on climate, while the Alpine foothills of
Upper Austria inspired studies of the origins of mountain winds and squalls.
Yet each of these local cultures endowed future imperial-royal scientists with
a set of tools for investigating the small scale in relation to the large.

S c i e n c e a n d t h e S ta t e
Still, it was a long journey from a training as a provincial naturalist to a career as an imperial-royal scientist. The professionalization of the sciences occurred in the Habsburg lands in roughly the same period as in western Europe
and North America, but it followed a different course. Whereas British and
American men of science could often look to industry or private educational
institutions to support their careers, Austrian scientists were almost wholly
dependent on the state. As university professors or gymnasium teachers or
employees of a research institute, they were Beamte (civil servants), a class
known for its identification with and loyalty to the dynasty. These scholars
had a relatively small degree of professional autonomy and depended directly
on the patronage of imperial ministries. Even when it came to academic hiring
decisions, it was often the opinion of an official in Vienna (or, later, in Prague
or Kraków) that carried the most weight.19 Rarely did an imperial minister
bother to read scholarly research. For these reasons, personal connections
and a public reputation built on popular writings were essential to advancing
in a scholarly career.
To appreciate these peculiar circumstances, consider the expression of
startled admiration that the botanist Anton Kerner received in 1869 from
Hermann Hoffmann, professor of botany at Gießen, in Hesse, upon having
learned of Kerner’s extensive research into phenology, the study of seasonal
phenomena. Hoffmann expressed the greatest admiration for Kerner’s “painstaking” data gathering and his “prudence” in their “successful interpretation.”
Yet Hoffmann had only been able to use Kerner’s research “in a few places in

72

Chapter Three

my own work,” because he had learned of it “only piece-meal through isolated
excerpts.”20 Hoffmann published in specialist journals like the Yearbook for
Scientific Botany, while Kerner’s work appeared in the Austrian Review, a
general periodical aimed at an Austrian audience. Hoffmann’s letter suggests
that the cost of attracting a nonexpert audience within Austria was the loss of
a specialist audience beyond its borders.
For many Habsburg naturalists outside Vienna, the only path to a scientific
profession was to take an active role in building the provincial academies, museums, and journals that could support such a career. As František Palacky put
it, “I might complain that in Bohemia I alone have been burdened with work
which in other countries is shared by governments, academies, and educational
institutions. . . . I must be hod-carrier and master builder in one person.”21 Alternatively, the first step for the ambitious might be to move to Vienna. But life
in Vienna, especially with a family, was extremely costly. In the early years of the
ZAMG, Director Jelinek had to petition the education ministry to pay an adjunct
like the young Julius Hann a salary that matched that of a Viennese middleschool teacher (who in turn earned even less than a teacher in the provinces).22
What would today be called the environmental sciences proved particularly
vulnerable in this context, since they were expected to produce knowledge of
immediate value to the state, for instance, for mining, forestry, and irrigation.
Scientists were loath to risk losing a minister’s favor by taking a controversial
stance. Consider, for example, the lengths to which the naturalist and forestry
expert Josef Wessely went to cloak a critique of the government in print. As
editor of the Vierteljahresschrift fur Forstwesen in the wake of the 1872 reorganization of the imperial forestry administration,23 he was looking to make a veiled
criticism of the forestry official Baron Julius Schröckinger von Neudenberg. So
he changed the spelling of the adjective schrecklich (awful) to schröcklich. When
the typesetter switched it to schrecklich, Wessely changed it back, adding a note
to the copy editor to leave it that way, but to no avail. “And so my journal purged
the only joke I’d made in the course of an entire year.”24 Wessely revealed this
ruse in correspondence with Emanuel Purkyne, a younger naturalist in Bohemia, intending it as a cautionary tale. He urged Purkyne to express himself
judiciously in print. As we will see in chapter 9, Purkyne did not heed Wessely’s
advice, and his career suffered the consequences.

The Imperial Body of Knowledge
How did the first generation of imperial-royal scientists win the authority to
speak as experts on the territory of the Monarchy as a whole? Imperial-royal

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 73

science was a corpus of knowledge embodied by its new practitioners, men
whose power was supposed to rest in part on their firsthand experience of
Austria-Hungary’s physical and cultural contrasts. As Julius Hann wrote in his
climatic overview of the empire for the Kronprinzenwerk, “Nature has made
it easy for the inhabitant of Austria-Hungary to cultivate climatic research. If
he has the Wanderlust and the means to satisfy it, he can— without crossing
the border— allow climatic contrasts to operate on him directly such as no
other European land offers within the same distances.”25 Such kinesthetic
knowledge of the Monarchy’s “physical contrasts,” “climatic boundaries,”
and “transition zones” was essential to the embodied identity of the imperialroyal scientist, an identity gendered masculine and ethnically unmarked. It
grounded the authority of their analysis of the relationship between parts and
whole within the natural system of the empire.
Elements of the accounts of scientific exploration written by imperial-royal
scientists will sound familiar to those versed in the rich historiography of the
nineteenth-century field sciences.26 Like naturalists working in western Europe, Habsburg investigators were often building on a long tradition of placebased, chorological research; and like scientific travelers in Europe’s overseas
colonies, they often had to struggle to make sense of unfamiliar landscapes and
cultures. What was unique in the Habsburg case was the absence of a clear
demarcation between the first mode of research and the second. The territorial continuity of the Habsburg lands made divisions between center and periphery, metropole and colony, far more ambiguous than in overseas empires.
Like western European imperialists, Austrian elites often viewed themselves
as bringing civilization to the “primitive” peoples on their peripheries, yet it
was far more difficult for them to point to the place on the map where civilization ended and backwardness began. Indeed, the Dual Monarchy eschewed
the term “colony,” preferring to view newly acquired land (Galicia in 1772,
Bukovina in 1774, Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878) as “natural” extensions of its
rule.27 This pretension was in fact one ideological motivation for the state’s
support of the earth sciences.
What were the conditions under which scientists traveled through the
Habsburg lands? To be sure, scientists traveled for purposes of pleasure or
health as much as other members of the Burgertum in the nineteenth century.
Indeed, they sometimes managed to combine work, leisure, and health cure
in one destination.28 But field scientists also traveled in other capacities. One
crucial to atmospheric science was the inspection of the stations of the imperial weather-observing network. As in astronomy, it was necessary to compare
the instruments against each other at regular intervals, in order to ensure the

74

Chapter Three

uniformity of observations. Kreil was on the road for three months at a time in
1855, 1856, and 1857 to inspect the network’s stations, of which there were only
ninety at the time. Thanks to his lobbying to the ministry of education, the
ZAMG received an additional 800 Gulden to fund these trips; but this was a
battle that each of his successors would have to fight for themselves.29 As Kreil
insisted, it was only by personally checking each measuring instrument that he
could be sure the measurements were fit to be compared.
Another form of travel characteristic of the field sciences was the expedition
or survey, in which scientists would traverse a region on foot, recording its
physical characteristics and sampling its minerals and plant life. In the context
of overseas empires, the scientific surveyor seemed to stand for the impersonal, objective, and potentially ruthless authority of the colonial state.30 In
the Habsburg context, the surveyor was a far more benign and ambiguous
figure, familiar to inhabitants across the empire since the days of Joseph II.
The surveyor appears in Austrian literature of the nineteenth century as one
who came by stories by virtue of having “gotten to know different regions
and different people.” As the surveyor-narrator of Stifter’s story “Kalkstein”
explains, “It’s part of my profession that I interact with many people and make
mental notes of them, and so I have acquired such a memory for people that
I even recognize those I saw years before, even a single time.”31 This was the
human side of survey work in the Habsburg Monarchy.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, university students and faculty
were engaging in field expeditions as part of Vienna’s new curriculum in physical geography. Since the eighteenth century, central Europe had fostered a
tradition of excursions organized by natural-scientific voluntary associations,
which brought together aristocratic and bourgeois members in patriotic celebration of the “local” environment, often the hills or lakes in the environs of
a town.32 But it was only in the middle of the nineteenth century, at Friedrich
Simony’s urging, that the territory of the Monarchy as a whole became the
first and foremost subject of geological study. Until then, geological research
had focused on mineralogy, while the biblical story of creation dominated
the teaching of earth history. As Eduard Suess recalled of the earlier period,
“Austria’s incredible diversity encompasses the ancient mountain massif of
Bohemia, the edge of the Russian plain, the far younger Alps and Carpathians,
and the western periphery of the Aralo-Caspian depression. Knowledge of
these great natural units remained entirely foreign to university instruction.”33
Suess, who became full professor of geology at Vienna in 1867, led students
on outings primarily in the Vienna hills. Albrecht Penck, appointed professor of geography at Vienna in 1885, made excursions an integral part of the

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 75

curriculum, and in 1896 the university received a subvention of 600 crowns
from the education ministry to fund them. There was at least one each year,
sometimes as many as three or four, each with the participation of up to two
dozen students and professors.34
Usually the destination was within a few hours of the capital, but sometimes these tours ranged further afield. By the 1820s, the Habsburg lands had
already entered the era of “modern tourism,” thanks to the eighteenth-century
state’s energetic construction of roads and a system for their maintenance.35
Nonetheless, in many parts of the Monarchy, travel remained arduous and
perilous at midcentury. As one mining official later put it, “The difficulties of
travel through large parts of the Monarchy placed geological field work at that
time on par with the voyages of discovery to unknown continents.”36 Eduard
Suess recalled that in the Alps in the 1850s, “one had to be quite content with
an only partially watertight roof, a bundle of hay to sleep on, a bowl of milk
and some black bread as a communal meal or with chicken-fat dumplings as a
special delicacy.”37 Scientists often had the help of servants and horses, but in
some cases they had to lug their own measuring instruments, specimens, and
other equipment. This was an age when scientists were encouraged to observe
and collect as widely as possible, so it was common for a researcher to harvest
the specimens of several disciplines at once, carrying the equipment necessary to each. Scientists in the field would need some instruments that would
function in extreme conditions, and others that, in the absence of detailed station data, would provide continuous baselines for comparison. For example,
when Kreil undertook his geomagnetic survey of the Monarchy in the 1840s, he
brought with him an instrument for measuring altitude and azimuth, two chronometers, three instruments for measuring declination and inclination, two
astronomical telescopes, two portable barometers, three thermometers, two
hypsometers for measuring altitude by means of the boiling point of water, as
well as “many small tools and instruments, books, maps, etc.”38 Typically, the
scientists would strike a base camp, then set out separately on day hikes. Since
mountainous areas remained only roughly charted, scientists often played the
role of land surveyor as well.
By the 1860s, field trips had become a core element of training in the earth
sciences. Julius Hann gushed in his diary over one of his first such outings in
May 1862, during his second year at the University of Vienna. It was a “turbid, hazy spring day” when he and his classmates set out for the hills on the
Vienna outskirts with professors Peters, Sommaruga, and Moisvar. “Climbed
around a lot in the meadows and quarries. Felt myself to be a foreign, tolerated
guest in these beautiful surroundings. Listened with longing to discussions

76

Chapter Three

of excursions in the Alps. Envied the lucky ones who could all talk that way.
What new pleasures life could offer through contact with such men. Winced
with sadness when I looked back on my lonely, empty life.”39 As a provincial
youth from modest circumstances, Hann saw himself as an outsider to Vienna
and its academic world. The following year, Hann recorded a Sunday outing
with Suess and several other distinguished naturalists in September. They discovered a marine fossil and met up with an officer of the Habsburg army who
was engaged in a “scientifically correct” survey of the land. “Had a splendid
time,” Hann concluded. Looking back at this entry, he added: “I think happily
of those first outings, as I climbed into our communal train car, where the
participants, with the exception of Sueß and Arnstein, were entirely unknown
to me. . . . Back then I had the highest, undiluted admiration for the great men
of science, who seemed to me almost beings of another order.” It was with
“peculiar delight” that he overheard one of his companions saying that he had
recently presided over a meeting of the geological section of the Congress of
Natural Scientists in Karlsbad, where he had sparred with the notorious Otto
Volger. “Among what scientific luminaries had fate dropped me? What names
might be theirs? I had no one to enlighten me, since Sueß was sitting outside
with the driver. So I could only listen devoutly to their conversation.”40
Hann’s accounts illustrate how field trips functioned to professionalize
and socialize young naturalists. As Eduard Suess insisted, finding “joy out
in nature” was something that could not be taught in schools. This capacity
proved “that man is not yet fully urbanized,” that he retains a remnant of the
“savage life” (Wildlingsleben) of the ancient human past. “One may forgive
the geologist, like the hunter, if he betrays something more of the savage.”41
Field excursions thus promoted camaraderie and helped to define a masculine
scientific identity that partially transcended differences of class and nation. In
some cases, these social bonds even developed into kinship relations. Among
the most prominent examples: Neumayr was son-in-law to Suess, Hann was
grandson-in-law to Kreil, Wegener was son-in-law to Köppen, Tietze was sonin-law to Hauer, and Wettstein was son-in-law to Kerner von Marilaun.
Nonetheless, a field excursion was not always a pleasant jaunt. Dangers of
various kinds, real and imagined, lurked in the less studied regions of the Monarchy. Kreil’s survey began in 1846 but was forced to break off in 1849 due to
the revolutionary unrest in and around Hungary. Already the previous year, in
the Banat, Kreil had suffered the indignity of being arrested as a spy; his loyal
assistant Karl Fritsch was accused of making a map of military fortifications.
To top it off, Kreil arrived home in Vienna sick with fever.42 Climatologists also
had to be on the lookout for thieves, especially given the expensive instruments

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 77

they lugged with them. Minor attacks were not uncommon circa 1800, and
possibly later as well.43 One night on the border between Galicia and Hungary
in 1870, three geologists witnessed the attempted theft of their coach driver’s
horse. In good humor, they reported, “Since there were three of us, the situation was less risky for us than for the horse.” It was “almost a shame,” they
added, that they wouldn’t be able to contribute a report on the arrest of a “pack
of bandits” to the journal of the Imperial Geological Institute. Then, turning
serious, they observed that the experience was “a warning to take the greatest
caution for times when each of us will have to travel alone.”44 Reports of danger
may have been exaggerated, however, given cultural associations between eastern Europe and North America’s “wild West.”45 In 1858, for instance, Anton
Kerner prepared for a scientific expedition to the Bihar Mountains between
Hungary and Transylvania by requesting permission from the Hungarian
authorities to carry weapons. He received authorization for “a double-barrel
shotgun for hunting and a double-barrel pistol for personal protection.”46 In
a published account of his research, Kerner recounted a terrifying encounter
with Hungarian highwaymen or betyar. Only at the end of his account did he
reveal that the whole incident had been a dream.47 Real enough, however, was
his sense of being cut off from contact with centers of civilization. Scientists
in the field had to rely on mail coaches for sporadic communication with the
institutes and ministries in Vienna.48
Beyond travel for leisure, health, the inspection of instruments, and survey
work, Habsburg field scientists were occasionally on the road for yet another
reason. Every successful scientist could expect to shift his residence multiple
times during his career. As Jan Surman has shown, the Habsburg universities
set in motion a characteristic circulation of scholars from provincial universities to the premier institutions in Vienna and Prague. Before liberalization in
the 1860s, the education ministry had a twofold strategy for harmonizing the
higher education system. It sought to bring in loyal, Catholic scholars from
abroad, and to circulate scholars between universities, in an effort to create a
common academic culture. It was common wisdom at the time that Habsburg
universities were divided into “universities of entrance, promotion, and final station.” Hence Theodor Mommsen’s memorable quip: “sentenced to
Chernivtsi, pardoned to Graz, promoted to Vienna.”49 After 1867, as influence
over hiring decisions shifted from the education ministry in Vienna to the
provincial administrations, this form of mobility diminished somewhat, and
nationality became a bigger factor in academic hires. Still, scholars continued to move between Habsburg universities, and this movement continued to
influence research trends. As Surman shows, Habsburg scholars themselves

78

Chapter Three

recognized the value of “intercultural mobility” to knowledge production, a
recent theme in the work of historians of science and empire.50
Field scientists were no different in this respect. The example of Josef Roman Lorenz von Liburnau, president of the Austrian Meteorological Society
from 1878 to 1899 and cofounder of Vienna’s first university for agriculture,
illustrates this well. Like Hann and Kreil, Lorenz was born in Linz, the eldest
son of a local official. Lorenz first taught gymnasium in Salzburg, where he began to study the local moors. As a teacher in Fiume/Rijeka, where he managed
to teach in Italian, he took up the study of the limestone formations known
as karst. Not long after, he was recruited for the state-sponsored survey of the
Adriatic coast. From there he was hired as a consultant to the agricultural
ministry in Vienna, at which point he turned his research to the Danube. Each
time he relocated, he redirected his research to a new environment.51 These
locales became part of his identity: when he was ennobled in 1878, he chose
to call himself “von Liburnau,” Liburnia being the ancient term for the area of
the Adriatic coast where he had studied karst.
The research of Anton Kerner von Marilaun likewise bears the marks of
a peripatetic career, which took him from Vienna, to Pest, to Innsbruck, and
back to Vienna. As the climatologist Karl Fritsch wrote in his obituary for
Kerner: “There is not the least doubt that his repeated change of residence,
which brought Kerner into regions that differed starkly from the perspective
of plant geography, thereby influenced him strongly. A man endowed with
such a gift for sharp observation would have to notice that many species of
plant that had previously been assumed to be homogeneous had a different
appearance in the Hungarian plains as in the foothills of Transylvania as in the
Alpine valleys of Tyrol.”52 As we will see in chapter 10, Kerner’s sensitivity to
this heterogeneity had surprising scientific consequences.

“ C a r- W i n d ow C l i m ato l o gy ”
Experiences of travel were crucial to the emerging sense of the Monarchy as
a geographic unit.53 As travel across the territory was regularized, it became
much easier to perceive coherence across the landscapes of Austria-Hungary.
New forms of transportation, including the railway, mountaineering, and ballooning, proved essential to the work of climatology; they also produced a
panoramic experience of empire.
The railway provided Julius Hann with the rhetorical framework he needed
to write a synthetic description of the climate of Austria-Hungary for the overview volume of the Kronprinzenwerk, which appeared in 1887. Hann imagined

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 79

a traveler making the half day’s journey from a wintry Vienna to the warmth and
sunshine of Fiume. He showed how rail travel could produce an experience of
unity within diversity. As he pointed out, a tireless traveler could cover the entire
east-west breadth of the empire, boarding in Czernowitz/Chernivtsi/Cernăuți
and disembarking in Bregenz, without being likely to experience a temperature
difference between start and finish of more than three degrees. Rail travel thus
furnished the illusion of being able to survey the Habsburg climate at a glance.
Surprisingly, mountaineering played an analogous role.54 As naturalists
hiked their way up mountaintops and down into valleys, they frequently thought
about the effects this trajectory would have on moving air. Heinz Ficker, an
avid alpinist, invariably described changes in weather in terms of the modification of air masses as they traversed peaks and valleys. In this vein, during his
research in Turkestan in 1913, Ficker often sketched the silhouette of a mountain in order to contemplate its meteorological effects. Likewise, he repeatedly
contrasted landscapes that were “open” to air masses with those that were
closed, going so far as to write of “invasions” of air into open valleys. Such
images made it possible to envision the mountain chains of the Monarchy not
as barriers, as they would appear on a two-dimensional map, but as features
that structured a continuous, three-dimensional circulation.55
More dramatically, Ficker also became intimate with the Alps by hot-air
balloon. The value of the aerial view was suggested by Crown Prince Rudolf ’s
introduction to the Kronprinzenwerk. He proposed “a tour through wide open
spaces, through multilingual nations, in the midst of constantly changing images,” leading the reader along “the path of the mountains,” as if on the wings
of a bird. The reality of ballooning was not quite so graceful. As Ficker put
it in his “Investigations of Föhn by Balloon,” the research was “disturbed by
many mishaps.”56 That much was to be expected when flying an inflated sheet
of cloth directly into a windstorm. But manned balloons nonetheless became
an important mode of climatological exploration circa 1900, and Heinz Ficker,
Albert Defant, Wilhelm Trabert, and Wilhelm Schmidt were all accomplished
balloonists.
One might expect that ballooning provided the ultimate panoramic view,
but that was not in fact the aim. Rather, the balloonist sought an unmediated experience of atmospheric dynamics: to become a test particle in the
wind field. And yet in reality his experience was mediated by the measuring
instruments that he carried with him. Ficker cautioned that the readings of
his instruments were “imprecise,” since the balloon was buffeted like “a toy”
by vertical air currents. More could be learned simply from the trajectory of
the balloon, he concluded. As the British meteorologist and balloonist James

80

Chapter Three

Glaisher described one flight: “Experienced a difficulty in reading the instruments. Lost myself, could not see to read the instruments.”57 It was precisely
by “losing oneself ” that the balloonist could begin to orient in new ways. Instead of the two-dimensional sense of space usually sufficient for everyday life
on the earth’s surface, the balloonist learned to find his bearings in the three
dimensions of the atmosphere. Thus Ficker built up from his own kinesthetic
experiences to a three-dimensional map of airflow over the Alps. In this way, he
also learned to distinguish between air currents that were “only of an entirely
local nature” and those with an influence on the “general flow.”58 The hot-air
balloon thus became an essential tool of scaling.
This pursuit of climatology as extreme sport was by no means the norm at
the time. By contrast, the Russian climatologist Alexander Voeikov was famous
for traveling in luxury. As Julius Hann wrote to Wladimir Köppen from Vienna
in 1886, “Voeikov is here, but I haven’t seen him yet. He has a nice life, our
friend! Little chance we’ll ever get to combine science and pleasure like that!”59
Voeikov’s research relied primarily on station data rather than firsthand observations. When he finally traveled to Turkestan— in his view, a pivotal region
for the climatic future of the Russian Empire— he rode in a private wagon
of the Trans-Caspian Railway, supplemented by coaches and automobiles.60
Other climatologists stressed the value of the climatological impressions of
an observer in motion. Robert DeCourcy Ward— one of Hann’s most fervent
admirers— applauded what he termed “car-window climatology.” Car-window
climatology was “non-instrumental, unsystematic, irregular, ‘haphazard’ if you
will.” It thus complemented the highly regular, instrumental, numerical observations that were coming to define this science by the early twentieth century.
“Travelers, even when passing rapidly through a country on the railroad, and,
still better, when moving more slowly on horseback or on foot, usually have opportunities for making simple non-instrumental observations which will add
greatly to the interest of their journey, and which, if the region is comparatively
little known, may really be of considerable importance.”61

Absolute and Lived Scales of Measurement
What could have been the value of firsthand impressions that were “unsystematic, irregular, ‘haphazard’”? Consider that the second half of the nineteenth century saw the rapid expansion of instrumental weather-observing networks, but
these networks remained incomplete. There was a flood of numerical data from
permanent observatories, but it was compromised by geographical gaps that
could only be filled in by the work of surveys. At the same time, late nineteenth-

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 81

century scientists were conscious of living through a transitional era in the
globalization of science: the closing of the heroic age of scientific exploration.
What did climatology stand to lose with this historical transition? “One
would hardly be wrong to characterize the predominant method of climatology today,” wrote the Heidelberg geographer Alfred Hettner in 1924, “by
saying that it consists in the analysis of the quantitative measurements of meteorological stations.” To view this as the only method, however, was to assume
that all “precise” climatological measurements were instrumental and to be
conducted at regular intervals over long periods of time. This was not the case.
Hettner insisted that not all observations could be made with mechanical instruments, and station nets were not dense enough to capture local variations.
Moreover, average values could not do justice to the “physiological” qualities
of a local climate, such as the length of seasons or the characteristic winds.62
Hettner cited Austrian authorities like Hann and Supan on this point. In
1906 Hann had lamented that the weather journals kept by observers of the
imperial network
do not contain nearly everything that one would consider desirable from a climatographic perspective. That is, namely, such recordings as are made without
instruments, as for instance the occurrence of the last damaging frost (Reif ) of
spring and the first of fall (which are not reported regularly enough to be able
to analyze them); further the date of foliation, of the first buds, of the ripening
of fruit of some widely distributed and familiar bushes, trees, and crops, in
which the specifics of the local climatic idiosyncrasies, namely the influence of
exposition, of a valley or cliff location, of the shadow of a mountain peak, etc.,
are expressed more easily, simply, and vividly than in instrumental readings.63

Heinz Ficker agreed wholeheartedly. As he put it in 1919 in his firsthand account of the climate of Turkestan: “on such a journey the eyes of the observer
are the best instrument, which make possible precisely those determinations,
which we seek in vain in the observation records of permanent stations.”64 The
distribution of plants and animals was an important indicator of the spatial
variation of climate. Local cultures also held clues. Thus an attentive climatologist would attend to the types of crops grown, the terms used for the winds,
and the locations where people gathered to restore their health.
In short, climatologists were interested in variables that were not readily
measurable with existing instruments. Instruments like thermometers and barometers had been developed precisely in order to isolate independent variables.65 But living things respond to meteorological elements in combination.

82

Chapter Three

Hence the interest in monitoring complex variables like evaporation, as well
as other factors deemed essential to organic life, such as insolation, humidity,
transpiration, and ozone content. Measuring these was often trickier than recording temperature or air pressure. Evaporation, a factor essential to agriculture, was particularly hard to measure, since it varies in complex ways with the
other meteorological elements and depends on the degree of ventilation of the
instrument. In cases like this, it was necessary to decide whether the variable
in question was to be measured “as a practical task” or “as a meteorological
and climatological element”— that is, whether a relative or absolute value was
needed.66
The early twentieth century saw the introduction of devices designed to
record factors vital to health such as ultraviolet radiation, ozone levels, and
newly defined variables like “felt temperature.” Many of these instruments
required expert manipulation and were prone to errors. Measuring humidity
with a hair hygrometer, for instance, relied on an organic rather than a mechanical response— the dependence of the width of human hair on atmospheric
humidity. But not all hair behaves the same. Incorporating the body into the instrument introduced the same errors of personal difference that afflicted subjective, noninstrumental observations. Meanwhile, in the subfields of medical
climatology and phenology (the study of seasonal phenomena among plants
and animals), organic bodies were the only relevant instruments.
For all these reasons, Habsburg climatologists often prioritized observations that were mobile, full-bodied, and multisensory. This emphasis resonates
strongly with Edmund Husserl’s notion of “prescientific” experience. Indeed,
Husserl’s phenomenology is uniquely helpful for understanding the work of
scaling in this place and time, since it took shape as a diagnosis of the state of
the natural sciences in central Europe circa 1900. It was a quest for the “prescientific” experiences out of which science had developed historically and from
which it derived its original human meaning. According to Husserl, the “prescientific” or “natural” world is known in large part through kinesthesis— the
sensation of one’s own bodily movements. Objects are “constituted” as observers move around them in space and time. The “natural” world is organized
by a division between “near” and “far” as defined by one’s own body— which
Husserl, making the link to measurement explicit, called the “zero-point.”67
Husserl argued that conscious movement has the potential to break down
this divide and replace it with an implicit scale permitting statements about
relative proximity. Likewise, Habsburg climatologists argued that personal observations recorded in transit, often on the basis of sensory impressions, could
correct and complement data from networks of permanent observing stations.

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 83

In phenomenological terms, their approach to scaling sought to reconcile the
“lived” scale of firsthand measurements with the “absolute” scale of station data.

A u st r i a a n d t h e G l o ba l i z at i o n
of Physical Geography
Studying Austria-Hungary as a territorial unit could also inspire thinking on
even larger scales. Before the advent of electronic calculators, analyzing largescale geoscientific data was extremely laborious. Julius Hann, for instance,
“lost all desire to take up a similarly wide subject again any time soon” after
completing his study of the daily variation of temperature worldwide. What
gave him the courage to undertake another global study a few years later was the
experience of working through calculations of the same type for the Austrian
half of the Monarchy. Through his “official post,” the task fell to him to analyze
the “very comprehensive” data of the Austrian meteorological network. “This
brought it back into my head to carry out for Austria the investigation I had
conceived earlier, in order subsequently to append some general comparisons
for a larger portion of the earth’s surface.”68 Two years later, Hann’s Handbook
of Climatology appeared, the most comprehensive survey and analysis to date
of worldwide observations.
Indeed, the Habsburg territory proved good to think with. It freed the field
sciences from the narrow horizons of the nation-state. This process produced
results with global application, from the equations of dynamic climatology as
worked out by Hann, Ficker, Margules, Defant, and Exner, to the climatology of prehistory as explained by Penck and Arthur Wagner, to Jovan Cvijić’s
(1865– 1927) theory of karst formation. In this sense, the field of view of the
imperial-royal scientist was crucial to the development of the understanding
of the earth as a whole. The supranational structure of the Habsburg state
shaped the logic of the field sciences, which strove at once for a view of the
whole and the legibility of local differences. At the same time, these panoramic
studies of the nature of Austria-Hungary contributed to a new understanding
of the political phenomenon of the supranational state: a vision of the Dual
Monarchy as “a structure formed not by chance but by necessity,” in the words
of Crown Prince Rudolf.69
Eduard Suess
Eduard Suess’s tectonic theory of the formation of the large-scale features of
the earth’s surface took shape as he pieced together a mental map of Austria’s

84 Chapter Three

geological landscapes. Born in London, Suess moved several times during his
youth, living in Prague and then Vienna. Each new environment he encountered made its mark on him. A recuperative stay in the Bohemian spa town of
Karlsbad, for instance, showed him a valley veined with granite, which was
“so strikingly different in landscape as in geological structure from Prague and
Vienna that I never tired of walking and observing closely.” Once employed at
the Royal-Imperial Mining Museum (Montanisches Museum), he traveled the
Monarchy in the service of its mineral collection. He also took up mountaineering in the Alps, hoping it would help him to regain his strength. One bright
September morning, after hiking for three and a half hours in darkness, he and
a companion reached the peak of the Dachstein, a mountain made famous by
Suess’s senior colleague, Friedrich Simony. “The living map spread itself out
wide below us,” Suess recalled in his memoirs. By then, at the age of twenty,
he had gotten to know several geologically different regions of the Monarchy:
“the granite landscape of Karlsbad, the limestone and slate mountains near
Prague, the tertiary landscape of Vienna, and one type of the Calcareous Alps.”
In Suess’s mind, these juxtapositions posed a riddle about the history of the
earth. “The contrast between the Bohemian Massif and the Alps was inexplicable to me; the elucidation of the riddle was from then on my life work.”70
Upon his return from a trip to France, he was struck again by the richness of
the Habsburg territory for geological study, by “the diversity of our empire.”
A trip to Galicia planted in his mind the question of why the western Carpathians differed so markedly from the area around Kraków —“such a great
contrast was hardly known anywhere else on earth at the time.”71 Already he
was thinking on a global scale, wondering, for instance, about the distribution of plants and animals across the earth’s surface and its implications for
the history of the continents. He worked by differentiating between local and
global phenomena, between evidence of processes restricted to one region and
evidence of a truly planetary process.
For the questions that interested Suess, questions above all about changes
in sea level, the Austrian Empire was ideally situated: “There the land is arrayed before us in unusual variety. Hardly anywhere in Europe are tectonic
contrasts so plainly presented— contrasts between the Bohemian Massif and
the Alps, between the portion of Russian table-land beneath the Galician plain
and the Carpathians, the peculiar connection of Alps and Carpathians, the
continuance of the Turkestan depression over the Aral Sea into the depression
of the Danube and to Vienna, and much besides.”72 Such contrasts could only
be explained with reference to a planetwide cause. In this way, he arrived at his
theory of “eustatic” or global shifts in sea level.73

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 85

As he remembered it, this theory was born “on the plains of Eggenburg,”
an otherwise unremarkable patch of Lower Austria, which only took on significance in relation to the other landscapes stored in Suess’s memory. “For
the first time I was seized by the thought that such extended uniformity could
not come about by an elevation of the land, but only by the sinking of the
water level.” Here lay the answer to his riddle. Subsequently, as he patiently
sorted through the work of colleagues around the world, Suess came to see a
planetwide pattern: stable continents on one hand, variable sea levels on the
other. There was no need to suppose a force of mountain uplift, as so many
of his contemporaries still did. His explanation of variations of the strandline
was elegantly simple and universal: “The crust of the earth gives way and falls
in; the sea follows it.” In other words, the earth was collapsing in on itself like
a desiccating apple. Suess attributed this bold hypothesis to his experience of
the physical diversity of the Habsburg lands.
Albrecht Penck
Unlike Suess, Albrecht Penck arrived in Vienna in 1885, at the age of twentyseven, fully formed as a geographer. Born in Leipzig, Penck had earned his
doctorate at the University of Leipzig and his habilitation at Munich. To his
former colleagues back in the German Empire, Penck’s career appeared to be
heading in a dangerous direction. They accused him of following the predilection of his mentor Suess for theorizing on a global scale. The historian of
science Norman Henniges describes the approach to scaling common among
German physical geographers at the time, which mitigated against large-scale
interpretations and reinforced the hierarchical structure of the German geological survey.74 By German standards, Penck was indulging in speculation.
In Austria, on the other hand, he was celebrated for his ability to tease out the
significance of local details within a global framework.
Like his colleagues in Vienna, and in disagreement with many in Germany, Penck came to see the Habsburg lands as a coherent unit: “Bohemia
and Moravia, Hungary and the Alpine lands, form a complete whole and not
simply the result of a clever politics of marriage. Vienna sits in the center of it
as the nexus of important thoroughfares. . . . It is a center of crystallization of
the highest quality.” Under new political circumstances, however, Penck would
later change his mind on this point. In an unpublished memoir written under
the Third Reich, he explained why he had accepted a job at the University of
Vienna in 1884 over an offer from Königsberg. He wrote that he been drawn to
Vienna for the city, the university, and for his colleagues Hann and Suess— and

86

Chapter Three

in spite of his sense that Austria was “a state in the throes of decline.”75 Yet a
memoir written under a dictatorship is a source to be read with care. Whatever
Penck’s private opinions on central European politics may have been during
his twenty years in Vienna, he shared the opinion of his colleagues there that
the territory of Austria-Hungary was an ideal field for modern “scientific”
geography.
Penck’s research benefited enormously from his time in Austria. He used
the physical geography of the empire as lecture material, preparing his students for fieldwork. What’s more, the eastern and Dinaric Alps were crucial
sites for his studies of Europe’s climate during the Ice Age. Small glaciers were,
as he put it, the best “climatic measuring instruments.” Observations of glaciers throughout the Alpine and southeastern lands of the Monarchy allowed
him to determine snow lines for the Ice Age. These suggested that weather
patterns had looked quite different than in the present, as had the distribution
of vegetation. In 1906, as he prepared to leave Vienna for Berlin, he paid tribute
to the empire he had served: “Far richer in geographical contrasts than most of
the other European states, [Austria] beckons above all for the study of its own
land. The wealth of contrasts of all kinds makes Austria an observing field for
geographers virtually unmatched in Europe.”76
Penck’s experience of the physical diversity of the Habsburg lands mirrored
that of Suess; not so his experience of the Monarchy’s human diversity. Again
treating his 1943 remarks with caution, consider this account of the process
by which he had “oriented himself ” “within the complicated physical composition of this state. I began to look around, traveled along the coast and
back by way of Agram [Zagreb] and Budapest. There I became aware just
how different were the levels of civilization in the individual regions that were
welded together in the Dual Monarchy. Only the old Austria was German, all
the others non-German, and I came to feel that the Germans were regarded
everywhere with mistrust. I only got to know the western part of the Monarchy,
but excursions with students indeed took me into the center of Hungary and
to Bosnia-Herzegovina, as well as Dalmatia. I encountered Transylvania only
later and Galicia and Bukovina not at all. That was a mistake.” Avoiding Galicia
and Bukovina was a mistake, presumably, from the perspective of 1943, when
geographical knowledge of the Polish-Ukrainian borderlands was of strategic
value to the Third Reich. What is striking about this passage is that the ethnic diversity so meticulously cataloged by Austrian geographers is reduced
to the categories of “German” and “non-German.” As Norman Henniges has
argued, Penck’s gaze was highly sensitive to geographic particularity, but dull
when it came to human observations. Ethnographically, Penck saw in Austria

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 87

only what he expected to see based on the crudest map of self and other.77 He
did not share the imperial-royal scientist’s commitment to maintaining the
legibility of human difference. Yet he did share a facility for thinking across
scales, evident in his glaciological reasoning about the climate of prehistory.
Even in the absence of any commitment to an Austrian Idea, Penck’s science
was nonetheless shaped by the structure of the supranational state.
Jovan Cvijić
Like Penck, Jovan Cvijić was not born into the Habsburg Monarchy, and yet
its territory proved essential to his research. Cvijić arrived at the University
of Vienna from his native Serbia in 1889, at the age of twenty-three, to study
physical geography with Suess, Penck, and Hann. By 1892 he had completed
a dissertation under their supervision titled “The Karst Phenomenon.” The
term karst was a German form of the Slavic word kras, meaning stony ground.
It referred in particular to the landscape of what were known as the “karst
lands” of the Dinaric Alps, a relatively barren landscape characterized by
caves, fissures, and sinkholes— dry on the surface, but concealing rivers in
its subterranean layers of porous limestone. In the rainy season, water would
pool along the margins of karst fields, but it would soon disappear and leave
the surface parched. According to Cvijić, the study of karst had progressed
farther in Austria than anywhere else by the late nineteenth century, partly
because scholars there had long taken a practical interest in the problem of
supplying water to this thirsty land. The geological riddle of karst received
renewed attention after the Habsburg army occupied Bosnia-Herzegovina in
1878. Irrigation and the construction of roads and railways demanded a better
understanding of the karst environment, and Habsburg geologists were commissioned to study the area. It was in Austria, according to Cvijić, that the two
dominant theories of karst formation had found their clearest articulations.78
The more popular theory held that karst was the result of the collapse or fracturing of layers of rock. Alternatively, some argued that karst’s peculiar form
was due to water percolating through the rock and either eroding or corroding
the limestone (that is, by a mechanical or a chemical process). By the time that
Cvijić arrived in Vienna, karst was a hot topic.
Cvijić’s approach to the subject was unprecedented in the breadth and
detail of his comparisons. He meticulously classified karst from different regions, with the aim of elucidating the relationship between surface structure
and subterranean hydrography. Particularly important were his observations
of karst formations in the Habsburg lands of Carniola and Moravia, alongside

88

Chapter Three

the classic example of the Dinaric karst. Inspired by Suess’s eustatic theory,
Cvijić paid close attention to water levels, and he was able to show significant
seasonal fluctuations. He concluded that the most important process in karst
formation was the chemical dissolution of limestone.
It was Cvijić’s 1893 publication that cemented “karst” as a universal term,
beating out competitors like le Causse, used by Édouard-Alfred Martel to describe karst in France’s Central Massif. Cvijić was hailed as the founder of
the field of karstology, and karst was recognized as a phenomenon “distinct
from the standard phenomena of fluvial geomorphology.” Of course, there
has always been the potential for confusion when using a regional name for a
general phenomenon. But that is precisely the point of this example: to see how
one local instance came to stand for a global phenomenon, and how Cvijić’s
knowledge of a few scattered fields of rock emerged as a global specialization.
Cvijić also surveyed the Balkans as an amateur ethnographer. By 1902 he
had covered most of the peninsula. He had even studied parts of the Ottoman
Empire, where he felt he was putting himself at risk, despite having more than
one cavalry soldier to escort him. Among the phenomena he observed were
the customs of the human inhabitants. As he put it, “A traveler conducting
research who crosses a large region is involuntarily drawn to making anthropogeographic observations.”79 Cvijić distinguished four different types of inhabitants in the Balkans, dividing these further into “varieties” and “groups.”
He emphasized that the distribution of these populations reflected a history
of migrations, driven in part by the difficulty of agriculture in the karst lands.80
Despite the differences among these groups, many of which he attributed to
their contrasting physical environments, Cvijić insisted that they were all part
of a single “South Slavic” nation. Note that this position was by no means disloyal to the Habsburgs. Many Habsburg patriots thought similarly at the time
and hoped that the Dual Monarchy would give the South Slavs a degree of
autonomy parallel to that enjoyed by Hungary. Indeed, Cvijić’s account of the
South Slav nation might be described as a small-scale version of the Austrian
Idea. It too rested on an ethnography of migration and exchange, and one that
argued for unity amid diversity.
*
According to Eduard Suess, it was a supreme virtue of geological field research
that it brought the scientist into contact with new cultures as well as new landscapes. In this way, Suess argued, earth science could provide an ethical education, a prophylactic against nationalist demagoguery.

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 89

The scientist may be fortunate enough to gaze into the spiritual life of another
nation. If he encounters there the same emotions, the identical sources of pain
and joy, the same appreciation for what is noble and the same avoidance of
what is base, then there awakens in him alongside patriotism a general love for
humanity. It may be an abomination to the professional politician, but it germinates deep in every healthy human soul, and despite the politician’s resistance,
it germinates in his as well, or rather has the potential to do so.81

Suess’s own political career bore out this thesis, as he consistently sought to
promote causes that transcended national divides, such as the provision of
clean drinking water, the regulation of the Danube, and the transfer of primary
education from church to state. Since Suess died in 1914, he was mercifully
spared the knowledge of the leading role that physical geographers would play
in the warmongering and border disputes during and after the First World
War. His formulation of the relationship between geology and universal humanism may have been naive as a general principle, but let us consider it instead as his interpretation of his own career. In his own experience, his ability
to scale between local structures and global causes was intimately connected
to his capacity for empathy. In this respect, Suess was carving out an identity
for the scientist as Habsburg civil servant.82

Conclusion
In The Climatology of Bohemia, Karl Kreil described the study of climate as
a negotiation between micro- and macroperspectives, between “the world on
the large scale and on the small.”83 As we will see in chapter 6, Kreil’s language
mirrored Adalbert Stifter’s often-cited defense of literary realism in the 1853
preface to Bunte Steine. There he justified his attention to ordinary people
and their ordinary lives by analogy to geophysics, specifically the study of
magnetic variations across the earth’s surface. The relativity of scale emerged
simultaneously as a methodological precept and an aesthetic principle in Austrian science and literature, its rhetorical power in one domain reinforcing its
resonance in the other.
Others tested the political force of this trope. The Bohemian philosopher
Josef Durdik, for instance, linked the Czech political project to natural science
through the personality of the Prague astronomer Johannes Kepler. Kepler’s
calculations were “bitter work,” but the goal, the “search for the whole,” was
ever present in his mind. He “explored the smallest details, but had always the
liveliest thought for the whole of nature— that is also the mark of intellectual

90

Chapter Three

health.”84 More famously, the Czech nationalist Tomaš Masaryk, author of a
youthful treatise on the classification of the natural sciences, labeled his political strategy “small, detailed, mundane work.” He drew an explicit analogy
to the significance of “small things” in the geosciences: “The world has stood
and [still] stands on work. . . . The world is maintained only by work, and
small-scale work at that, by constant work. As in geology, there are no catastrophes, nor have there ever been; what were once considered to be isolated,
sudden catastrophes we now recognize to be the result of countless small and
smaller influences.”85 Intentionally or otherwise, Masaryk was echoing the words
of J. E. Purkyne upon launching the first Czech-language scientific journal,
reminding his readers of the need to attend to small details.
More than mere rhetoric, this principle was meant to regulate the organization of scientific work in the multinational empire. It stood for a pluralist approach to the coordination of knowledge, without recourse to a single
overarching system, nor to a hierarchy of explanations, nor even to a common
language. And it kept alive the link between scientific knowledge and the quotidian, local purposes that had, historically, motivated its production.86
The work of scaling was political work in this sense: in Habsburg learned
societies, naturalists negotiated the value of their varied local perspectives
relative to the goal of a synthetic overview. Suess expressed this ethos in the
preface to the monumental physical atlas of the Monarchy, Das Bau und Bild
Österreichs (1903), which he coauthored with three distinguished colleagues,
each responsible for a different region. He alerted readers at the start: “This is
not a collective work. Just as each of the authors has collected his observations
on his own journeys and has reached his conclusions independently, thus each
has chosen to approach his account in his own way; and what is offered here is
therefore not one representation, but rather four representations in one shared
frame.”87 Thus the work of producing an overview of Austria-Hungary’s natural foundations advanced like the piecing of a quilt, the seams attesting to the
value of each contributor’s local perspective. In Prussia, by contrast, the task
of a wide geographic survey gave rise to a rigidly hierarchical structure for
geological fieldwork, with the intention of eliminating individual subjectivity.88
Not so in Austria. Austrian field scientists opted instead for what Marianne
Klemun describes as a culture of consensus building, in which the synthesis
depended on proper respect accorded to each contributor’s regional viewpoint.89
In this way, the rhetoric of scaling translated the politics of science into the
politics of empire and vice versa. Hann drew the parallel explicitly, likening the
naturalist who neglects details to a haughty prince who ignores the petition of

The Imperial-Royal Scientist 91

a poor woman.90 But the prince could not afford to lose sight of the forest for
the trees. Thus, in a 1906 essay on the globalization of atmospheric science,
Hann expressed his satisfaction that meteorology had finally moved beyond
the narrow-mindedness of Kirchturmpolitik or “church tower politics.”91 This
was a term that had come into frequent use over the past decade as Habsburgloyal statesmen denounced the rising politics of nationalism. On behalf of his
scientific discipline, Hann was laying claim to the broad-mindedness of modern internationalism. The language of Habsburg climatology took shape in this
political context, tacking between “detailed work” and the “synoptic” view.

Chapter 4

The Dual Task

Vienna’s Central Institute for Meteorology and Geomagnetism defined itself
against comparable institutions in other lands by virtue of its “dual task,” as
Kreil explained in the first volume of the institute’s yearbook. It would be a
“model institution,” demonstrating the most modern, precise, and thorough
methods of geoscientific observation; and, at the same time, it would be the
central node of the empire’s observational network, “which surveils everyone and, when necessary, instructs and assists.” This language of duality succinctly expressed the opportunities and challenges of imperial-royal science.
As Kreil elaborated, the “dual task” demanded that Habsburg scientists train
their attention in two directions at once: one eye on the international scientific
community, which sought results of global significance, and the other on the
Habsburg populace and its varied needs.
Our institute distinguishes itself significantly in this way from other institutions of the same kind, which either exist only in seclusion for themselves as
observatories, or, without engaging in observation themselves, are concerned
only with the analysis and publication of observations arriving from their stations. This dual purpose also makes necessary a corresponding division of our
labor, which cannot be dedicated exclusively to one or the other, but must keep
both equally in sight.1

This dual task demanded a dual vision, a gaze split into two fields of view.
In this way, the concept of duality entered Habsburg science a decade and
a half before the Monarchy itself became “dual.” This chapter explores the

The Dual Task 93

meanings that Kreil attached to “duality” and its scientific and political significance.
Duality meant seeing double, from more than one standpoint at once. It is
a principle contained in the very label “imperial-royal”— an invocation of the
two identities of the monarch, as simultaneously emperor of the composite
state of Austria and king of its individual crown lands.2 In the sciences, duality
signified the aspiration to embody simultaneously the virtues of a global Wissenschaft and a situated Landeskunde. Politically, duality delineated the unique
responsibility of the imperial-royal scientist to speak both to an international
audience and a national one. At a time when the profession of scientific “popularizer” was emerging in western Europe, the imperial-royal scientist was
charged with bringing his research to the public himself. What motivated this
distinctively public role was the fervent hope of the 1848 generation that the
field sciences could motivate transnational cooperation both within and beyond the Habsburg borders. Kreil’s concept of duality also tracks two strains
of research: a “replicative” approach that treats the local atmosphere as a laboratory for the investigation of universal laws and a “chorological” approach
that studies the local atmosphere as a unique piece in the jigsaw puzzle of the
global circulation. The history of modern atmospheric science has depended
on the complementarity of these approaches.

A Meteorological Mittelpunkt
Austria took the first steps toward an empire-wide weather-observing network in the 1840s, lagging behind the “global renewal of the earth sciences”
by French, British, and Prussian scientists in the previous decade.3 Austrian
scientists were aware that they had been outpaced. They knew little about how
the earth’s climate and magnetic field varied spatially across the Habsburg
lands. As Kreil wrote to Alexander von Humboldt in 1843, “The time will soon
come in which the new science cannot rest content with the results of scattered European stations, but will study the magnetic force over every square
mile.”4 Kreil began this undertaking with a geomagnetic survey of Bohemia,
supported by the Bohemian Academy of Sciences. In 1844, he won imperial
funding to extend his work across the Habsburg lands. Accompanied by his
eager assistant Karl Fritsch, Kreil spent the next three summers on the road,
devoting winters to calculation. The pair covered Upper Austria, Tyrol and
Vorarlberg, Lombardy, Lower Austria, Styria, Illyria, the Adriatic coast, Venetia, Dalmatia, Moravia, Silesia, northern Hungary, Transylvania, and Galicia.5
In order to coordinate measurements across such a vast space, they relied on

94

Chapter Four

the methods and instruments for which Kreil had won renown as director of
the Prague observatory. They also enlisted collaborators who were suitably
distributed across the territory, in Kremsmunster, Graz, Innsbruck, and Tarnow (Galicia). The ultimate goal was a permanent observing network spanning the entire Monarchy.
The founding of the Academy of Sciences in Vienna in 1847 lent new energy to this project. The idea for such an academy had been around since the
days of Leibniz, but numerous initiatives had failed for lack of enthusiasm or
because scholars disagreed on the form it should take. Meanwhile, provincial
learned societies were founded in Bohemia in 1770 and in Hungary in 1825;
Croatia (1866) and Galicia (1873) followed, and a new Czech Academy of Sciences and Arts formed in 1890. In the 1840s, as talk of constitutionalism and
republicanism spread among central European intellectuals, the notion of an
imperial academy found an unlikely proponent in the conservative chancellor,
Count Metternich. He advised the emperor that the state should provide an
outlet for new ideas rather than allowing them to fester.6 Emperor Ferdinand
gave the academy his approval and granted it the freedom to publish without
interference from the imperial censor.
What distinguished the Vienna Academy of Sciences from other learned societies of its day was its explicitly supranational mandate. As historian Christine
Ottner points out, the initial proposals referred to the academy as the “central
node” (Centralpunct), indicating its intended role of assembling scholars from
across the empire. From the start, however, opinions diverged on the proper
relationship between center and peripheries. When the academy’s first president drew up a tentative list of members, Metternich and his underlings criticized it for favoring residents of the imperial capital too heavily. They warned
that the academy was in danger of becoming a local society for Vienna instead
of a genuinely imperial institution. Archduke Johann, the inspiration behind
the Joanneum in Graz, was among those who recognized what provincial
scholars could contribute. The academy president acquiesced, and the initial
list of forty full members included thirteen from outside Vienna, including representatives from Hungary, Bohemia, and Lombardy-Venetia. There remained
disagreement over the language(s) in which discussion would be conducted,
as well as complaints about the dues owed by provincial members, since it was
unlikely that they would attend meetings regularly. The geologist Wilhelm
Haidinger (1795– 1871) even called on the government to provide scholars with
railway tickets in order to travel to the meetings in Vienna in a manner “befitting their class.”7 The events of 1848, however, shifted opinion in favor of the
centralizers, and meeting attendance by provincial scholars fell accordingly.

The Dual Task 95

In climatology, the notion that Vienna was the Monarchy’s “central node”
was particularly resonant, but equally laden with ambiguities. Already in the
spring of 1849, the Academy of Sciences had begun to plan an imperial institute for the study of meteorology and earth magnetism. In language typical of
the reformist spirit of the 1840s, academy members lamented that Austria had
fallen behind other states in this field of research, and “that it must go a step
farther where possible in order to put right, in a sense, what has been neglected
here for so long.” The press likewise stressed the need to make up for lost time
in “coming to know the general laws of atmospheric change in our climate.”8
Note the reference to “our climate.” Of course, no one believed the climate of
the empire to be uniform. Rather, the phrase evoked the political orientation
of Kreil’s project, its “whole-state” patriotism.
In a memo to the education ministry in July 1850, Kreil called for the creation of an observing network spanning the “entire monarchy.” He argued that
the study of meteorological and magnetic phenomena was of great importance
due to their influence on human life and commerce, as well as for the investigation of the laws of nature. The Habsburg territory comprised so many different “climatic zones” that abundant observing stations would be necessary,
and the ZAMG would require exemption from post and telegraph charges
and funding to send scientists to inspect these stations periodically.9 In public
addresses, Kreil explained that the science of the atmosphere was a product
of the “awakening of the spirit of research” in the eighteenth century, and that
it depended on “association,” since “the individual can only be productive
in communication with others.” By Kreil’s count, at the time of writing there
were ninety-four observing stations in the Austrian empire. It was, therefore,
“without doubt high time to unite the dispersed and isolated efforts around
one common purpose; to standardize and guide them; in short, to call to life
an organic whole, an observing system.”10
This patriotic language of organic unity and “communal goals” was keyed
to the political circumstances of 1848. Climatology was exactly the kind of
“outlet” that Metternich had in mind for the Academy of Sciences. It seemed
comfortably apolitical in comparison with fashionable topics of historical and
philological research. It would appease liberals with expectations of economic
gain. And the cooperation and coordination it demanded would help to bind
the peripheries more tightly to the imperial center.
The research of this network was to be broad in scope. At the time, “climate” designated not only atmospheric conditions but many phenomena of the
organic world that stood in a relationship of interdependence with the atmosphere. Thus the factors to be observed included properties and phenomena

96

Chapter Four

that would be viewed today as part of meteorology, hydrology, atmospheric optics, and seismology, as well as “other unusual phenomena.”11 This list reflects
the many practical applications that scientists foresaw for climatology. Kreil
himself expected the greatest benefits for agriculture, public health, and shipping.12 The network’s observations were also used to assess the fertility of land
in order to calculate property taxes, and as evidence in legal cases in which a
defendant might claim innocence of a tort due to a meteorological “act of God.”
The most innovative aspect of this program was the phenological
observations— that is, records of periodic phenomena in the lives of plants and
animals, such as the appearance of leaves, flowers, and fruits, the migrations of
birds and fish, and the metamorphoses of insects. The origin of phenology as a
science is usually traced to the Belgian astronomer Adolphe Quetelet in 1841.
However, the Prague botanist Karl Fritsch had begun a phenological record
back in 1834, before Quetelet. In recognition of this work, Fritsch was called to
Vienna to become vice director of the new ZAMG.13 He composed instructions
for phenological observations far more detailed than those of Quetelet. The
value of this program was immediately recognized by Austria’s leading botanist,
Franz Unger, who saw it as foundational to the burgeoning science of botanical geography. Like Kreil, Unger emphasized that “collaborative observations
are most necessary.” “Until now,” Unger wrote, “individual naturalists have
given the most contradictory answers to such questions. It is self-evident that
here only comprehensive observations, undertaken on a large scale, by many
people simultaneously, and through many generations, can achieve the goal.”14
Phenology became an essential tool for visualizing the space of the empire
and its history. Tracking the onset of the seasons introduced the perspective
of migrating animals as they periodically traversed this space. It also evoked
the point of view of human migrants, whether they traveled for seasonal
employment— as many did in this era— or for seasonal stays at spas and resorts. When such observations were collected across generations, as Unger
urged, they could also reveal temporal fluctuations of climate. Unger believed
that human activities like agriculture could temporarily alter the climate, and
he was evidently eager to collect evidence of such effects.15 The result of these
efforts was to add a dynamic, temporal element to the emerging map of climate
across the Habsburg territory.

D e f i n i n g D ua l i t y
As Kreil explained, the ZAMG would be a premier research institution, a
“model” for observatories in other lands. In everything connected to mete-

The Dual Task 97

orology and geomagnetism, it would not merely reproduce the highest state
of scholarship but push beyond it. At the same time, the institute would be a
clearinghouse for observational data from across the Monarchy, a “center of
calculation,” in Bruno Latour’s sense. It would house the standard instruments
against which all others would be calibrated, and it would instruct “friends of
these disciplines” in their use.16 However, unlike imperial institutions such as
London’s Met Office and Kew Gardens, the ZAMG also promised to serve
directly the practical needs of the empire’s provinces.
Imperial and Provincial
This promise was taken seriously by those outside the metropole. Consider,
for instance, the assessment of the Moravian geographer Karl (Karel) Kořistka
in 1861. Kořistka identified himself as a loyal Habsburg citizen. He praised the
“whole-state” science of the past decade and the new institutions that were
producing it, both imperial and provincial. He suggested, however, that the
time had come to make these results useful to local communities. “Every friend
of the fatherland who has attentively followed the intellectual efforts and undertakings of the last decade will confirm that these, steering clear of the space
of political activity, have been directed, mostly with success, to the study of the
natural composition, as well as the ethnographic, agricultural, and industrial
conditions of the extensive lands of the Austrian state as a whole. . . . It seems
to us that it is now time to synthesize the results of this work within the framework of individual provinces.”17 To illustrate how this knowledge could be
applied, Kořistka edited a Landeskunde of Moravia and Silesia that included
a chapter on the regional climate penned by Carl Jelinek, the director of the
ZAMG at the time, and which relied on the data of its network.
The Moravian meteorologist and climatologist František Augustin also
praised the ZAMG, but was more pointed in noting that it had emphasized
synoptic-scale and basic research at the expense of small-scale, applied studies. “One cannot reproach the central institute in Vienna if it does not want
to lose sight of the main goal of meteorology, which consists of the determination of meteorological laws and of research on the leading climatic factors,
to which recently has also been added the conduct of synoptic studies.” In
doing so, however, it had neglected “ancillary interests such as detailed climatic research on individual provinces or the pursuit of meteorology with
respect to field and forest management.” Augustin argued that now, in 1885, it
fell to the crown lands to right this balance between centralization and decentralization.18 What exactly this entailed, however, was not yet clear. Two years

98

Chapter Four

later, Augustin would stand accused of plagiarism for having claimed a Czech
translation of several pages of Hann’s Handbook of Climatology as original
work. The ensuing scandal raised the question of what provincial autonomy
in the sciences would actually mean.19 Augustin’s accuser was a cartographer
and young Czech politician. He prefaced his charge against Augustin with the
phrase: “But the appearance deceives; truth prevails.” This was an invocation
of the Hussite motto associated with Tomaš Masaryk’s campaign in the 1880s
to expose the forgery behind what were claimed to be founding documents
of the Czech nation— a motto that would later appear on the banner of the
president of Czechoslovakia. This critic clearly hoped to see “Czech science”
pursued in future with greater integrity and independence of mind.
In fact, the ZAMG worked hard to combine empire-wide research with
local, practically oriented studies. In 1914, for instance, the institute was asked
to weigh in on a proposal from officials in Bohemia for the establishment of stations for the measurement of evaporation, a critical factor for agriculture. The
stated aim was to study the climate of Bohemia as closely as possible as an aid
to the selection of crop varieties and fertilizers.20 Director Trabert responded
that the ZAMG had long overseen measurements of this kind in Bohemia and
had put the results in the hands of locals, for instance, by furnishing vineyards
with predictions of nighttime frosts. Trabert applauded the effort to build out
the observing network in the “purely Czech part of Bohemia,” which had
remained “weak” despite the efforts of “Czech colleagues.” But he objected
that a Bohemian institution would “overstep its mandate” if it were to process
the data itself.21 In this way, the ZAMG would remain the center of calculation,
even while tailoring research to local needs.
Private and Public
Kreil also described the ZAMG as “dual” in the sense that it was both a private
and a public institution— part of a private academy, yet working for the public
good. The implication was that the imperial-royal scientist could serve the
state and still lay claim to a scholar’s intellectual freedom. This was consistent
with Kreil’s own institutional affiliations. His position as director of the ZAMG
had come with an appointment as full professor of physics at the University of
Vienna, where faculty had fought for academic freedom in 1848 and won. Yet
Kreil and his successors would struggle to maintain a balance between loyal
civil service and intellectual autonomy.
Duality in this sense also implied that the ZAMG was not a typical nineteenthcentury observatory, where astronomers or geophysicists would tuck them-

The Dual Task 99

selves away and pursue research undisturbed by the public.22 Seclusion was
not an option. It was the responsibility of the institute’s scientists to make
regular treks across the Monarchy to inspect and calibrate measuring instruments throughout the network. It was also their duty to engage the public as
scientific observers. Tellingly, Friedrich Simony chided the typical observatory for being more of a corner for scientists to retreat into than a window
onto the world. He advised scientists to get out and travel. Meteorologists, he
said, needed to develop a painter’s eye for nature’s variety, and this was not
something they could acquire from the “narrow space of the observatory and
from its instruments.”23 Far from sheltering scientists in a metropolitan tower,
the ZAMG was to be their portal onto the empire at large.
Universal and Particular
Finally, the ZAMG’s task was dual in the epistemological sense of balancing the quest for universal laws with attention to local peculiarities. “There is
probably no scientific task on which local conditions have a greater influence
than meteorological observations,” Kreil wrote. Weather records reflected
local geography and an “abundance of minor circumstances, to which one
usually pays too little attention.” In this category of “minor circumstances,”
he included the course of nearby mountain chains and rivers, the proximity of
ocean or standing waters, the geological conditions and vegetative cover, and
the situation of the measuring instruments. “Ignorance of these circumstances
places everyone who wants to use such observations in danger of ascribing to
the influence of the atmosphere what actually is a result of local conditions,
and thus to draw false conclusions.”24 Atmospheric science therefore required
working simultaneously at multiple scales.
*
In sum, the task of the imperial-royal atmospheric scientist was dual in three
respects. First, he was meant to establish Austria’s scientific reputation internationally, while also catering to the local and practical needs of each crown
land. Second, he was both a scholar and a civil servant, autonomous in some
respects but not in others. Thus he was responsible to a private society, the
Academy of Sciences, and to the public, who took an eager interest in his science and felt entitled to its results. Finally, he was to pursue the universal laws
of geophysics, but also the endless forms those phenomena might take within
the borders of the Monarchy.

100 Chapter Four

The ZAMG presented itself as dual in these ways when it approached the
public to request their participation as volunteer observers. In 1869, Director
Jelinek oversaw the publication of an official guide to meteorological observation. In keeping with Kreil’s definition of duality, the guide explained that the
observing network had two goals: to “determine the climatic conditions of a
given area,” on one hand, and to “generate the material for an investigation of
the general laws of the atmosphere,” on the other.25 Accordingly, observers were
instructed to locate their homes on “a good map,” and to identify a window
facing north or north-northwest. They were then prompted to describe how
their local environments— whether flat or hilly, coastal or inland— modified
the “general air currents.”26 As ambiguous as these instructions may have been,
they effectively communicated the essential problem of disentangling locally
contingent phenomena from those unfolding on a larger scale.

“Public Feeling”
The first foreign visitors to the ZAMG were surprised that such a modestlooking institution could be publishing such impressive results. Its quarters
consisted of a tight space in a new building on Favoritenstrasse, already a busy
part of town and growing ever busier. It was an improbably modest space,
but chock-full of self-registering instruments of Kreil’s own design. Kreil did
his best to make the space work for precision geophysics. In order to sight
the horizon, for instance, he first had to obtain permission to have a balcony
built. Desperate as he was to make improvements, Kreil initially sought public
support. But he soon learned to keep his head down, working “in silence and
seclusion” on bustling Favoritenstrasse.27
To outsiders, it was a mystery why such an energetic and outspoken man as
Kreil had fallen so quiet. Within a few years, the work of the institute suffered
from lack of financial support, and Kreil gave up the annual publication of the
network’s observations.28 Even to his own staff, his behavior appeared mysterious.29 Had Kreil acquired a taste for seclusion? The evidence sooner suggests that the “darkness in which he hid himself ” was a response to political
circumstances. The controversy, since forgotten, went back to the early days of
the Academy of Sciences. In the heady weeks of the summer of 1848, a group
of scholars, led by the geologist Wilhelm Haidinger, had formed a rival association, the Society of Friends of the Natural Sciences, with a more populist
and pluralist agenda.30 It would address all branches of science and be “open
to all.”31 Consistent with his pluricentric program, Haidinger simultaneously
worked to develop parallel bodies elsewhere in the empire, including Moravia

The Dual Task 101

and Silesia, Pest, and Milan.32 Although the Society of Friends of the Natural
Sciences described itself respectfully as an outgrowth of the Academy of Sciences, it stood as a powerful critique of that institution. Its members lamented
the exclusivity and narrow research interests of the academy.33 Haidinger, who
became director of the new Imperial Geological Institute in the fall of 1849,
drew the ire of members of the new academy, and his institute fell under attack.
Due to the academy’s influence, the Geological Institute was threatened with
budget cuts or even dissolution. When Austria’s military loss in 1859 plunged
the state into fiscal crisis, Haidinger’s worst fears were realized. The Imperial
Geological Institute was put under direct control of the Academy of Sciences,
its budget was cut, and the state stopped paying rent on the institute’s quarters
at the Palais Lichtenstein.
What saved the Geological Institute was the beginning of the end of neoabsolutism, as the budget shortage forced the emperor to compromise with political liberals. Subsequent generations of Habsburg geologists reveled in the
story of how their science had been rescued by the downfall of neo-absolutism.
On the floor of the newly “strengthened” parliament, in the fall of 1860, the
institute found its defenders: aristocrats who praised the practical value of
geological research for mining and pointed to the international prestige of the
Imperial Geological Institute. Count Andrassy, the future Hungarian prime
minister, argued that science flourishes under conditions of competition, not
monopoly, and the institute should therefore be allowed to remain independent of the Academy of Sciences.34
This was a victory for the principle of pluralism and a turning point for the
politics of science in imperial Austria. With the liberal agenda gaining traction
after 1859, Habsburg scientists could seek public engagement without fear of
reprisal. For the field sciences, in particular, this was a transformative opportunity. The lay scientific networks and associations that developed across the
Monarchy in the following decades proved essential to the fields of geography,
geology, botany, zoology, ethnography, and last but not least, meteorology and
climatology. Perhaps in celebration, Karl Fritsch delivered a pair of public
lectures in Vienna on meteorology in the fall of 1861, “On Meteorological Observations” and “The Climate of Vienna.”35
Kreil had led the ZAMG through its desert years, but he would not live to
see the promised land. He passed away in 1862 at the age of sixty-four, without
having published even the first volume of his projected climatological survey
of Austria. At Kreil’s death, “this institute found itself in a desperate situation”
financially.36 It was left to his successor, Carl Jelinek, to realize Kreil’s vision
for the Habsburg observing network. In 1865, the Austrian Meteorological

102 Chapter Four

Society was founded with the goal of fostering public interest and participation. It published the premier journal of the discipline, the Zeitschrift der österreichischen Gesellschaft fur Meteorologie, later the Meteorologische Zeitschrift.
Jelinek’s detailed “Instructions to Observers” was an international model and
would remain in print for decades. Under Jelinek, the number of observing
stations in the ZAMG’s network grew from 118 to 238.37
By the time Hann took over the directorship from Jelinek in 1877, the publicspirited orientation of the ZAMG was firmly ingrained. And yet, internationally, it was increasingly evident that publicity was a double-edged sword for
meteorological institutions. In Britain, as Katharine Anderson has shown, the
Met Office’s botched attempts at storm forecasting were drawing public outrage. To critics, it looked like a great deal of public money was being wasted
to record data that was put to no good use. Asked by a member of parliament
whether it was worth the expense of continuing to publish the Met Office’s
daily observations, the astronomer royal George Biddell Airy argued in 1877
that meteorological publications were a matter of “public interest.”38 Airy’s invocation of “public interest” resonated in Vienna. Twenty-five years later, Hann
was still repeating it for readers of the Meteorologische Zeitschrift. He pointed
out that the director of the ZAMG was frequently asked by local authorities or
even private individuals for meteorological data, to inform public services or
economic calculations. He quoted Airy to the effect that “public feeling is an element not to be put out of question in matters of this kind.”39 What Hann called
(in English) “public feeling” was a factor that could not be ignored in Vienna.

T h e I m p e r i a l N e t wo r k
With the founding of the ZAMG, meteorological observations could be made
across the empire “according to a uniform scheme,” “providing the basis for all
investigations of the climatic conditions of the empire.”40 Yet this satisfaction
masks some shortcomings. The Monarchy was not evenly covered by the new
observing network (see figure 9). The station density was much higher in the
western lands than in the east, higher too in the north than in the south. Allowing for differences in population density, Carinthia had the most stations per
person, followed by the other Alpine lands and Bohemia; Hungary, Transylvania, Galicia, Bukovina, and Lombardy-Venetia had the fewest. In 1870 Galicia
averaged one station per forty-eight square miles, while Tyrol and Vorarlberg
counted one for every fourteen square miles.41 Some claimed that the problem
was a lack of interest in meteorology among non-Germans. The truth was
hardly that simple.

The Dual Task 103

F i g u r e 9 . Distribution of meteorological observing stations in the Austrian half of the
Habsburg Monarchy, 1876.

Since the new network was born amid revolution and war, it did not originally include Hungary, Croatia, and the Italian lands, where fighting continued
through 1849.42 In Hungary, meteorological observations had been recorded
on and off since 1783 at the observatory in Buda and elsewhere. The geographer Janos/Johann Hunfalvy worked with the ZAMG to synthesize these,
producing a climatographic overview of the Hungarian lands for the journal
of the Austrian Meteorological Society in 1867.43 Meteorological observations
formed part of the charge of the new natural-scientific committee organized
by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in 1860. By 1863 there were eleven
stations in Hungary, and by 1866 there were twenty-six.44 A Hungarian Central
Institute for Meteorology was founded in 1870, at which point there were 152
stations in operation in the Hungarian half of the Dual Monarchy.45 Thereafter,
Hungary took full responsibility for its own climatic research.
The Habsburgs’ brief coastline on the Adriatic represented another gap in
the network. Atmospheric observations along the coast were vital to Austria’s
shipping interests. Throughout the 1860s, Jelinek was in frequent contact
with the imperial Hydrographic Bureau in Triest. In this region, however, the

104 Chapter Four

network faced unusual challenges, particularly after Austria’s loss of Lombardy in 1859. Jelinek complained about the difficulty of enlisting unpaid collaborators in a region where Italian nationalism was rife.46 He regretted that he,
like Kreil before him, had no personal influence in the region, and he appealed
to the imperial government for diplomatic assistance in the recruitment of
observers. Interestingly, Jelinek justified this request not only with reference
to knowledge of sea winds for shipping, but also, more fundamentally, “from
a climatological perspective, because the conditions of the mainland differ
from those of the islands.” In fact, climatological research had been under
way in Görz-Gradisca and along the Croatian coast since 1859, and in 1866
the government and the Academy of Sciences sponsored a cartographic and
physiographic survey of the Adriatic, which encompassed both the periodic
(climatological) and nonperiodic (meteorological) conditions of the coast. 47
To the ZAMG, the Adriatic coast was not merely a source of storm warnings;
it was part of the larger picture of the climatic conditions of central Europe.
The most problematic region of all for the ZAMG was Galicia. Despite
Vienna’s attempts to seed new stations there, local societies took the research
into their own hands. Galician geologists had set a precedent for doing so in
1869 by opting out of the Austrian geological survey. The Academy of Sciences
in Kraków established its own commission for the production of a geological atlas of Galicia, although this was apparently based on surveys led by the
Imperial Geological Institute in Vienna. In the 1880s a row erupted between
Kraków and Vienna over the right to publish a geographical atlas of Galicia.
Geographers in Kraków insisted that the Viennese survey had been carried
out too quickly and the resulting map contained errors. They accused the Viennese of taking a “flagrant attitude” and “monopolizing scientific research.”48
In meteorology, cooperation between Vienna and Kraków likewise got
off to a rocky start. Instrumental weather measurements had been made in
Lemberg/Lwów/Lviv since the 1820s.49 Several local organizations later took
up this work, among them the Balnealogical Commission, the Meteorological Section of the Physiographic Commission of the Academy of Sciences in
Kraków, the Tatras Society, and the Bureau of Melioration (part of the Provincial Executive Board), established in 1857, 1865, 1877, and 1881, respectively.
Not surprisingly, the stations were unevenly distributed, with their center of
gravity in the wealthier western half of the crown land. Galician naturalists
had hoped to get the network off the ground in the west, then use the Tatras
Society to expand it eastward. Instructions for meteorological observations
were first published in Polish in 1867, but were not identical to those issued
by the ZAMG.50 Some of the instruments used were supplied by Vienna, but

The Dual Task 105

others came from Kraków and were not calibrated against those of the ZAMG.
From the available sources, it seems that many of the Galician stations sent
their observations to the Meteorological Section in Kraków rather than to Vienna. These observations, meanwhile, were often of dubious quality. Despite
Kreil’s insistence on the exhaustive description of the observing site, most of
the reports came with no description of the terrain. It may be that the quality of
observations declined with time. When the ZAMG sent its inspector to Galicia in 1877, he found conditions at the seven stations he visited to be far from
satisfactory. Thermometers were placed at different heights above the ground,
precipitation was measured at different times of day, and some observers used
local time while others used central European time.51
The root of the problem in Galicia may have been the ZAMG’s insistence
that observers work on a volunteer basis, without pay— a hard sell among the
poor, largely rural population of Galicia. Indeed, in 1895, when the Hydrographical Bureau in L’viv took over the stations of the Kraków Academy of
Sciences and began paying observers for their work, the supply of observations increased dramatically. These observers included teachers, state forest
workers, and farmers, all of whom were undoubtedly happy to have the extra
salary. Some even quit when they did not receive a raise. According to the only
historical study of meteorology in Galicia, the Hydrographical Bureau was the
sole agency that succeeded in collecting reliable climatological observations
in Galicia.52

I m p o s i n g S ta n d a r d s
Thus the Monarchy remained unevenly covered by the observing network,
and where stations existed, they did not necessarily proceed uniformly. In
fact, for years there was no uniform observing schedule— “because one cannot
demand of voluntary observers that they keep to a schedule that, due to their
other occupations, is inconvenient, often even impossible.”53 What then was
the best way to calculate a daily average temperature for measurements taken
in different places at different hours? The author of a 1901 study of temperature variability in Austria tested dozens of different formulas, an exercise that
only served to emphasize the infinite number of possible combinations. None
could be considered the “true” average.54 How could this heap of numbers
be transformed into a standardized set of variables with which to construct a
continuous overview of the Monarchy’s climate? Given the limits of standardization, the fundamental challenge was to devise a rational method for comparing data recorded by different observers at different stations in different

106 Chapter Four

environments at different times, and to represent the results without creating
the illusion of greater certainty than was warranted. As Victor Conrad later put
it, “the principal and fundamental aim of climatological methods is to make
the climatological series comparable.”55
A first class of obstacles involved the variable conditions under which
measurements were made. Consider, for instance, the subjective character
of observations of elements such as cloudiness and precipitation and the inconsistent participation of volunteer observers. Add to these disruptions to
telegraphic communications, shoddy instruments, and the unreported substitution of one instrument for another. One commonly overlooked problem, for
instance, was a leaky rain gauge. A small hole gradually grew, until someone
thought to repair or exchange it— at which point, “the cycle began anew.”56 A
researcher relying on a series of rainfall measurements from this station faced
the problem of distinguishing between real variations in rainfall and those
due to the varying leakiness of the container; real variations were just as likely
as those due to the leak to exhibit a periodic character. The problem was one
that climatologists summed up by calling such a measurement series “inhomogeneous”; a homogeneous series, by contrast, was one where variations
were caused only by the meteorological elements under study. In principle,
homogeneity could be judged via comparison to measurements from a nearby
station, since real variations in rainfall could be expected to affect surrounding
measurements as well.
Other problems arose from the fact that weather stations came into and fell
out of use at different times. This could lead to skewed inferences: an average
January temperature taken from a few years of particularly cold weather would
make that location look misleadingly colder than the rest of the region. In order
to compare a shorter series of observations with a longer one, it was therefore
necessary to “reduce” the former to the time period of the latter. To that end,
the station that had been operated consistently was termed the “normal” station and its period of operation was the “normal” period. “Reduction” meant
a correction based on the difference between (or ratio of ) the average of the
meteorological element (e.g., temperature or rainfall) at the two stations over
their coinciding periods. This difference was expected to be more constant
than the element itself, assuming that the two stations were similarly affected
by the same weather events.
This method of reduction became increasingly important to Habsburg
climatology in later years, as scientists attempted to fill in gaps in their knowledge of the empire’s peripheries. To take an extreme example, consider Victor
Conrad’s determination to complete his Climatography of Bukovina after the

The Dual Task 107

outbreak of the First World War. Until 1910, Bukovina had no meteorological
station south or east of the capital, and the station density in Galicia and Bukovina was approximately one-fifth that of the rest of the Austrian half of the
monarchy.57 The provincial school ministry had complained that the forecasts
published for eastern Galicia and Bukovina were useless for the latter, since
the combination of rivers and mountains gave Bukovina an entirely different
climate than Galicia. Conrad in turn blamed the problem on a shortage of suitable observers: the local population was “on too low a level with respect to
intelligence and reliability.”58 In wartime, however, even these limited observations were beyond Conrad’s reach, and he relied heavily on methods of
reduction. Conrad’s satisfaction with these approximation methods seems
to have been tied to his assessment of Bukowina’s climate as “monotone,”
although hardly benign. Its precipitation features, for instance, were “actually
quite simple”: the plains were dry, while rainfall increased with altitude, although no strict regularity could be derived from the scanty data. Instead, to
demonstrate the region’s tendency to extreme summer rainfall, Conrad relied
on a personal anecdote: an afternoon downpour in 1912, when a “torrential
river” flowed through the streets, carrying pieces of furniture, and “in which
a few small dogs are said to have drowned.”59 Conrad evoked a peasant culture at the mercy of nature. By portraying such an “extreme” as “characteristic” of Bukovina’s climate, Conrad reinforced his description of the region
as “continental,” a technical term implying extremes of heat and cold, but
here also carrying the stigma of “eastern.” Conrad quickly reached the conclusion that the “impact of the steppe climate” was so strong that “gradually
even the great morphological differences of landscape and their influence on
the climate are obliterated by it; the climate of Bukovina is monotone.”60 In
this way, the climatologist circumvented the problem of scarce data. A land
so closely related to the steppes was predictable even in its unpredictability.
Methods of reduction were also essential to the climatography of Serbia
that Conrad produced during its wartime occupation by the Habsburg army.
He described this work paternalistically as “a form of rescue effort,” relying
as it did on data the Serbians had failed to publish, produced by stations that
had been “swept away by the war.” In typical colonialist language, he insisted
that “meteorological and climatological research is a cultural imperative
[Kulturförderung],” and hoped that his efforts would serve Serbia’s “reconstruction” “in the near future.”61 That the Serbian observations would require
extensive statistical manipulation was self-evident, for they were riddled with
“many printing errors and untrustworthy values.”62 Conrad’s methods of reduction found an ultimate, if circular, justification in his conclusion that Ser-

108 Chapter Four

bia’s climate was “easy enough to describe,” “neat and clear,” “an extraordinarily simple and easily predictable image.”63 Conrad’s final judgment was that
Serbia displayed “a central European climate with strong continental traits.”
Its stormy, dusty southeastern winds were a boon to agriculture, he admitted,
but a bane to human health and comfort.64
A striking contrast to Conrad’s simplifications can be found in the climatography of Bosnia-Herzegovina published in 1918. Austrians typically
described Bosnia as a backward, mountainous land where the environment
set rigid constraints on social development, and where forests were still “intact.” Experts urged that the region’s natural resources be managed directly
by the state according to a “wise use” ethic. For this reason, the state placed
a premium on the “rapid scientific conquest” of the colony.65 The Habsburg
military had begun to construct climatological stations in Bosnia shortly after
Habsburg occupation in 1878. Hann had deemed these lands a “total terra
incognita” for climatology, inhabited by a population whose attitude toward
weather was “Oriental fatalism.”66 Of particular interest to the Habsburg authorities was data on rainfall in the karst region of western Bosnia and Herzegovina, which was judged to be inhospitable to agriculture and human
health due to its excessive heat in summer and fierce bora winds in winter.
The karst region attracted geological and hydrological studies geared to improving the land for agricultural use, a project for which climatic data was also
essential.67
The 1918 Climatography of Bosnia and Hercegovina was published by the
Institute for Balkan Studies in Sarajevo, which had been established by private
means in 1904 and would be dismantled by the provisional Bosnian government in 1918 as an institution “that served Austro-Hungarian interests.”68
The study’s author was the Prague physical geographer Julie Moscheles, a
descendant of a cosmopolitan family who would describe herself in the wake
of World War One as an Anglo-German “with no sense for national feuds.”69
Unlike Conrad in his studies of Bukovina and Serbia, and unlike Hann in his
climatological sketch of Bosnia of 1883, Moscheles chose not to use reduction
methods to compensate for significant gaps in the data. She found reduction
appropriate to the “western and central European climatic region,” but unsuited to Bosnia’s highly variable blend of continental and subtropical traits.
The climate of Bosnia-Herzegovina varied so greatly in time that a different
“normal” station would be needed from year to year— and even for each meteorological element. Robert Donia has argued that the Habsburg authorities
worked to subvert Serbian and Croatian nationalism in Bosnia by promoting
a “multireligious Bosnian identity based on Bosnians’ common loyalty to the

The Dual Task 109

territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina.”70 The genre of climatography would seem to
be a valuable resource for fostering a territorial identity. In practice, however,
the Climatography of Bosnia and Hercegovina suggested that even a territorial
identity might be unstable: “In extreme cases our entire region falls first into
one sphere of influence, then, shortly after, into another.”71
Whatever their solution, Habsburg climatologists recognized that the
method of reduction was not foolproof and that they often worked at its furthest limits of applicability. The more widely spaced the stations, the less secure this method would be. Hann summed this up in an empirical equation
stating that the variation in the differences between series from two stations
increases linearly with both the distance between the stations and their difference in altitude. In certain areas, however, this equation breaks down, and
the variation in the differences in a given direction in space becomes discontinuous. Beyond that geographic divide, the normal station no longer serves
as a useful reference point. The region is no longer “climatically coherent,” to
use a term that Victor Conrad introduced in the 1920s. Instead of throwing
up their hands, however, imperial climatographers turned this incoherence
into an analytical tool in its own right. Such lines of discontinuous variation
served to identify “climatic divides.”72 In this way, statistical manipulations
could bring local contrasts into focus, giving definition to a landscape viewed,
of necessity, from a distance. Klein’s Climatography of Styria likened this effect to scaling a peak in order to make the landscape below intelligible. Just as
the view from above could reveal the geomorphology of the surface, so could
statistics provide “a liberating overview.”73 Such was the power of statistics to
resolve a disorderly natural world into a map of diversity.

A Privileged Viewpoint
Klein’s analogy to a mountain outlook was not fortuitous. Mountain observatories can be understood as points of leverage in the effort to achieve a scientific, integrated vision of the Monarchy. Thus the short-lived Sonnwendstein
station in the Semmering was promoted as the key to weather forecasting for
the entire Mediterranean: with low-pressure centers arriving from the north,
the Alps became “the weather wall or the weather hinge [die Wetterseite resp.
der Wetterwinkel] of the Mediterranean region. What Iceland is for northern
Europe, the chain of the Alps is for the Mediterranean.” The southernmost
Habsburg lands were said to require high-altitude observatories in the Alps
as a “form of secondary defensive line.” In this way, “potentially two thirds of
all weather events in the south of Austria could be placed under surveillance

110

Chapter Four

[unter Kontrolle].”74 These martial metaphors of “defense” and “surveillance”
suggest that mountain observatories were associated with the fantasy of a vantage point from which to achieve a strategic overview of the empire.
At the same time, the view from above was popularly associated with a
supranational, pluralistic perspective. Thus the Galician writer Leopold von
Sacher-Masoch founded an “international review” of science and culture in
1881 under the title Auf der Höhe (At the Pinnacle). The journal’s program was
contained in its title, as the first issue explained:
We will not rest content with excluding every narrow-mindedness, every hateful prejudice in political, national, religious, scientific, or literary matters; our
goal is far more to make our review a neutral ground, on which no interests are
presumed to be those of humanity in general, on which the major intellects of
all nations and orientations can address each other openly and honestly, but
always with respect.75

In this sense, the view from “the pinnacle” represented the pluralist ethos of
imperial-royal science, as developed within the new state institutions of the
1840s and 1850s.
From the earliest days of European alpinism, the mountain had functioned
as a site of science in two quite different ways.76 One way was “replicative,”
in the sense introduced above: tall peaks furnished a physico-chemical laboratory, where experiments on inanimate matter or living bodies could be
conducted under extremes of low pressure and intense radiation. This type
of research sought universal laws, results that would be independent of any
particular locale. A second mode of mountain research was “chorological”:
it focused on what was specific to a given mountain site, whether in its natural or human history. Such chorological knowledge might serve the needs
of locals and/or contribute to projects of documenting the variety of natural conditions on a larger scale. As mutually exclusive as these two ways of
approaching the mountain might seem, they proved mutually reinforcing in
practice.
Although Austria’s mountains and coastline were prized as windows onto
the passage of storms, Habsburg scientists never saw mountain and coastal
observatories merely as perches from which to watch weather pass. On one
hand, in a replicative vein, they sought a basic physical understanding of how
the physical existence of the mountain or coastline modified weather locally
and beyond. But they were equally interested in coastal and mountain climates
for their own sake, from a chorological perspective. As in the work of the Adri-

The Dual Task 111

atic Commission, they investigated how these unique physical environments
interacted with human and nonhuman life. From the replicative perspective,
the coastline or mountain was a laboratory, a space for producing generalizable
atmospheric effects under extreme conditions. From the chorological view, it
was a field, a place where distinctive atmospheric conditions were collected
like specimens, as clues to patterns of geographic variation.
Tellingly, the Austrians fell into conflict with American scientists on precisely this point. Americans conceived of mountain observatories far more
narrowly as aids to forecasting. The high-altitude stations set up by the US
Weather Service were not intended to contribute to basic research, nor to descriptive climatology. The Americans were skeptical of the replicative function
of mountain observatories in Austria. Specifically, they disputed the mountain’s status as a laboratory for the investigation of the physics of storms. On
the basis of data from the Sonnblick, Hann claimed to have refuted William
Ferrel’s thermal theory of cyclones by showing that cyclones correlated with
cool temperatures at high altitude. Ferrel retorted that the observatory had no
means of determining air temperature nearby at the same height. A temperature
reading at the Sonnblick might be below average for the season, yet still warmer
than the surrounding air. More fundamentally, Henry A. Hazen and Henry
Helm Clayton rejected the Sonnblick’s claim to be a good approximation to
the free air. Hazen charged that the Sonnblick was really part of an extended
mountain range, “not an isolated peak,” and for that reason its data alternately
mimicked the local climatic effects of one or the other of its neighboring valleys
(see figure 10).77 Ferrel, Hazen, and Clayton rejected the Sonnblick as a site of
replicative investigations.
This disagreement highlights the unusual status of mountain meteorological observatories in Austria-Hungary. Throughout the first half of the
nineteenth century, Alpine tourism and scientific attention to mountains had
grown hand in hand. The Austrian Alpenverein, the earliest mountaineering
club in continental Europe, was founded in 1862 by natural scientists with the
primary goal of opening up the mountains to scientific research. According
to a survey of the “most important” mountain weather stations worldwide
in 1900, seven out of thirty-two were in Cisleithania, all but one of which lay
in the Alps; an eighth, in Habsburg-occupied Bosnia, had the much-touted
distinction of being the only high-altitude observatory on the Balkan Peninsula. These observatories were buoyed by a unique set of political affiliations.
First, mountain observatories were local projects of modernization: funded in
part by regional mountaineering clubs and tourist associations, they helped to
extend an infrastructure of transport and communication and to further open

112

Chapter Four

F i g u r e 1 0 . Sketch of the Sonnblick by Julius Hann shortly after the observatory’s opening
in 1886. In his disputes with American scientists, Hann argued that the Sonnblick was an “isolated peak” approximating the climate of the open air. He wrote to Köppen: “The small peak
is kept consistently free of snow by the wind. So there is no danger of a glacier forming. The
position of the house is entirely open and towering [ganz frei dominant].”

up the mountains to tourism. At the same time, the new high-altitude observatories were meant to help mitigate the impacts of modernization. By the
1880s, ethnographers realized that traditional ways of life in the mountainous
regions of the Habsburg Monarchy were endangered. As putative “survivals”
of an earlier stage of cultural evolution, mountain cultures were uniquely valuable to the burgeoning nationalist movements in central and eastern Europe
that were intent on establishing their historical authenticity. This explains
the fascination of both Polish and Ruthenian nationalists with the vanishing
cultures of the Tatras.78 In these respects, mountain observatories were provincial as well as imperial projects, helping to record and preserve elements
of local culture and the local natural environment. Accordingly, the enormous
costs of these stations was split between local voluntary associations and the
imperial government.79
That is to say that mountain observatories had both an imperial and a local
agenda: to connect isolated points to the empire’s observing network and to
record and preserve what was unique to their locales. Let’s see how this dual
program played out at three mountain observatories in three very different
regions of the Monarchy: Carinthia, Bohemia, and Bosnia.
Sonnblick
At 3,105 meters the Sonnblick (see figure 11) was the highest year-round observatory in Europe at its opening in 1886. It perched like a doll’s cabin atop
the jagged peaks of the Hohe Tauern, aside massive glaciers, reinforced against

The Dual Task 113

winter storms known to pile snow thirty feet deep. Imagine, then, the surprise
of visitors to find on this remote summit “the most modern lighting technology
of the day.” In an age when the streets of Vienna were still lit by oil lamps, the
Sonnblick enjoyed electrical lighting, telephone service, and— the pièce de
résistance—a mechanical lift to ferry scientists, tourists, and supplies from the
valley to the mountain top. “It is indeed quite a wonderful effect, when the
Edison lightbulbs suddenly twinkle against the night sky.” To find a working
telephone on a mountain covered in several meters of snow amazed even the
scientific elite. The elevator that carried guests to the top struck an idiosyncratic balance between modern comfort and backwoods adventure. The machinist played up this incongruity by swaying the lift or stopping it dead at the
most vertiginous moments, all in order to frighten the young women— whom
the observatory’s patron, Ignaz Rojacher, made a point of accompanying. Austrian scientists were fond of noting that the Sonnblick’s communications technologies were unique in the high Alps: “Consider that in Oberpinzgau from
Zell am See to Mittersill— that is, for a stretch of 30 kilometers— there is no
telegraphic connection; and that a considerable part of this long and beautiful
alpine valley, with its hamlets and ruggedly picturesque [wildromantisch]
vales, must forego this modern means of communication.” Thus the Sonnblick’s claim to fame was not merely its technical accoutrements, but this particular juxtaposition of the “modern” and the wildromantisch.80
Indeed, the Sonnblick had an explicit modernizing agenda. Protoindustrialization had arrived early to the Hohe Tauern: its gold mines hit a
modern high point in the late fifteenth to early seventeenth centuries, generating wealth that produced a bustling village and school near the Rauris gold
mine, the future site of the Sonnblick. In the seventeenth century, however,
the Little Ice Age began to transform the Rauris Valley. Mining suffered from
the advance of the glaciers, although it did not cease entirely, and the village
descended into poverty. The glaciers did not begin their retreat until the 1850s.
This coincided with two crucial historical developments: the rise of alpinism
as a leisure activity and the industrialization of the Austrian Alps. From the
eighteenth century, the surrounding province of Carinthia slowly emerged as
a center for iron production, although it was held back by the absence of coal.
Facing the evidence that the mountain had been mined to excess, the mine’s
director, Rojacher, offered the highest point of the Rauris as the site of a meteorological station. According to another participant in the venture, it was
Rojacher’s bid to redirect the energies of the local population and to “elevate
public spirit.” The journal of the Sonnblick society presented these transformations as having successfully brought the Rauris Valley into the modern

114

Chapter Four

F i g u r e 1 1 . The Sonnblick observatory in Carinthia, ca. 1915.

world. At the same time, the journal reported on archeological finds from the
early modern heyday of the mining village, and published an ethnographic
study of the survival of pagan forms of weather knowledge.81 Thus the Sonnblick was celebrated at once for its role in modernizing the Rauris Valley, conserving its natural beauty, and salvaging its cultural traditions.
Donnersberg/Milešovka
Meanwhile, the turn of the twentieth century also saw the opening of mountain observatories in the Carpathians, the Ore Mountains (Erzgebirge/Krušné
hory), and the Dinaric Alps. Their construction coincided with the monarchy’s
experiment with policies of decentralization, devolving authority onto provincial governments in the attempt to resolve nationalist standoffs. This was also
the period in which the ZAMG experimented with the decentralization of its
weather service, on the principle that more localized observations could better

The Dual Task 115

serve the needs of agriculture, trade, and tourism. Scientists at the ZAMG
repeatedly endorsed proposals to give the individual crown lands greater control over the weather service; indeed these researchers were eager to be free
of the responsibility for daily forecasting. In the end, however, only Tyrol was
allowed to test an independent weather service. The ministry of education
closed the debate on decentralization in 1913, ostensibly on financial grounds.
The ZAMG also rejected demands to translate its forecasts into languages
other than German.82 All the while, however, provincial institutions were taking the matter into their own hands, setting up their own local meteorological
networks and publishing their own results, some in Italian, Czech, or Polish.83
At the turn of the century, a group of German-speaking Bohemians active in
the regional Heimat movement began to agitate for the construction of an observatory on the Donnersberg (also known as the Milleschauer or Milešovka)
in the Ore Mountains, on the border between Bohemia and Saxony (see figure
12). The Donnersberg rose only 834 meters, a molehill Alpine standards. Yet
its proponents claimed that, for meteorological purposes, a mountain was defined by isolation, not height.
Nineteenth-century descriptions of the Ore Mountains emphasized that
they were surprisingly densely populated for such a raw, harsh land. The view
from the Donnersberg revealed to an observer in the 1830s a “land blooming with craft production [Gewerbefleiss], covered in all directions with cities,
market towns, and villages.”84 This was taken as evidence that Bohemians
had successfully overcome constraints of soil and climate.85 Yet industry still
required protection from the hazards of weather. As the “Central Committee for the Construction of a Meteorological High-Altitude Station on the
Donnersberg” wrote in its petition to the imperial government, Bohemia was
an “orographically and meteorologically unique land,” plagued by “weather
damages and elementary catastrophes.” Hence it needed forecasts based on
local observations, and, therefore, a mountain observatory— at a cost of approximately 70,000 crowns. The plan’s backers solicited designs from five
architects. Tellingly, the winning proposal was for a miniature stone castle,
replete with gables and a ten-meter-high tower with a panoramic balcony.
The interior even followed local custom in placing a living room next to the
kitchen on the south side. The observatory would be reachable in an hour
or two on foot from the train station in Boreslau/Bořislav, making it relatively
accessible by the standards of the era. In promotional materials for the observatory, its scientific director expressed the hope that it would “awaken in the
many visitors a lively interest and contribute much to popular enlightenment
in this field.” For meteorology was a field where “ineradicable superstition and

116 Chapter Four

F i g u r e 1 2 . The Donnersberg/Milešovka observatory in Bohemia, 1910 postcard.

archaic survivals, combined with the biases against any innovation, stand in
the way of any kind of research like an impregnable bulwark.”86 The Donnersberg observatory, then, was to be a Heimat-tourism attraction and a venue of
popular enlightenment.
Bjelašnica
A mountain observatory in Bosnia-Herzegovina was a modernizing project of yet
another kind. As we have seen, the Habsburg state commissioned climatological
studies of Bosnia in order to inform typical colonial projects of land improvement and river regulation. By 1894, the engineer Philipp Ballif had organized

The Dual Task 117

F i g u r e 1 3 . The Bjelašnica observatory in Bosnia-Herzegovina, ca. 1904.

seventy-seven weather stations in Bosnia.87 He and Hann advocated for a new
observatory that would extend the ZAMG’s network of high-altitude stations
dramatically to the southeast. The imperial government opened the station at
Bjelašnica in 1894, at a height of 1,067 meters and a cost of approximately 30,000
crowns.88 Its data would be supplemented by the Romanian state meteorological network and Bulgaria’s observatory in Sofia. Since Bjelašnica lay directly in
the path of low-pressure troughs traveling from the Adriatic across Hungary to
the Black Sea or across Austria to the Baltic, it was well positioned to telegraph
storm warnings to Vienna and Budapest. Indeed, Bjelašnica was arguably more
central than even the Sonnblick to central Europe’s weather. The Bjelašnica
observatory was thus a step toward the scientific conquest of the Balkans. Yet
in the photographs that circulated in the scientific community (see figure 13),
Bjelašnica lies shrouded in winter frost, accessible only through the kitchen
window. These images reinforced the conclusion that Bosnia-Herzegovina was
destined to remain a primitive land, a colony literally by nature.

Conclusion
These high-altitude observatories throw into relief the institutional “duality”
of Habsburg climatology. The observatories on the Sonnblick, Donnersberg/

118 Chapter Four

Milešovka, and Bjelašnica were “dual” in the sense of being both public and
private institutions, with both imperial and local agendas. They reinforced the
consciousness of imperial-royal climatologists that they were immersed in the
medium they were studying, constrained to observe from one or another local
perspective. This duality was essential to the character of climatology in the
supranational state. After 1867, Vienna was only one of the Dual Monarchy’s
two capitals, while Prague, Kraków, and Zagreb were all eager to lay claim to
equal status with Budapest. The “centrality” of the “Central Institute” was
thus questionable. And in fact, after 1870, Hungary had a “Central Institute”
of its own. In this sense, there could be no definitive perspective from which
to gain an overview of the Monarchy. This was what the ZAMG learned when
it sent scientists to Galicia to collect observations, only to find that many were
being sent to Kraków instead. This duality— the center’s awareness of being
peripheral from a competing vantage point— determined the multiple scales
on which climatological research unfolded.

*2*
The Scales of Empire

Chapter 5

The Face of the Empire

An unusual collection of objects went on display in the Vienna palace of the
exiled Count Klemens von Metternich in the wake of the revolutions of 1848:
fossilized creatures, mineral specimens, geological profiles, and panoramic
paintings of the Alps. The exhibit was the work of the legendary naturalist
Friedrich Simony (see figure 14). It was the event that launched his scientific
career and, with it, the discipline of physical geography in imperial Austria.
Simony was born in Bohemia to an unwed mother and raised by her and
his grandfather, a senior civil servant in Olmutz. After only two years at gymnasium, the fourteen-year-old boy was apprenticed to an uncle as an apothecary.
By the late 1830s, Simony’s pharmaceutical practice in Vienna was lucrative
enough to allow him to pursue his love of natural history. He completed gymnasium through private tutoring, began attending lectures at the University of
Vienna, and made his first long treks through the Alps. At this time, the winter
climate of the high Alps was still a mystery to naturalists. Simony’s notes on his
early ascents are filled with recordings of temperature, atmospheric visibility,
winds, and the forms of clouds. The peak that he called the most beautiful
in all the Alps, the Dachstein, served him as an “aerial observatory,” where
he could hang his instruments and set about “to study occurrences in the
kingdom of the clouds.”1 Among the occurrences that intrigued him were wintertime temperature inversions, when upper layers of the atmosphere become
warmer than lower ones— a characteristic of mountain climates that held clues
to atmospheric dynamics and the health effects of pollution. Over the next decade, Simony became renowned for his exploits as an alpinist, for his popular
lectures on the natural history of the Alps, and for his exquisite landscape art.2

122

Chapter Five

F i g u r e 1 4 . Portrait of Friedrich Simony (1813– 96).

It was also in the course of the 1840s that Simony won the patronage of the
most powerful man in central Europe, Count Metternich. Metternich’s daughter Melanie saw Simony as a curiosity: “a very interesting man” who had given
up his profession to study geography and to “spend his life on the summits
of the Alps, where he remains even in winter.” Count Metternich took a lively
interest in the late Enlightenment project of a global physical geography and
was in regular correspondence with naturalists like Humboldt and Leopold
von Buch. In these last years before Metternich’s fall from grace, Simony could
often be seen coming and going in his lederhosen from his patron’s palace on
Vienna’s stately Rennweg.3
It was within those walls that Simony managed to chart a new course for
Habsburg science. By the late 1840s, he had expanded his already remarkable
geological collection by another forty crates. He had also mapped the depths

The Face of the Empire 123

of Alpine lakes and produced a geological profile of the eastern Alps that measured six and a half meters.4 At the Palais Metternich, these objects attracted
the admiration of Count Leo von Hohenstein, the man whom the new emperor
had entrusted with a top-to-bottom reform of the Habsburg universities. In a
conversation that lasted three hours, the count displayed an insatiable curiosity about Simony’s research. He was particularly intrigued by the hypothesis
of the Ice Age, and even asked to take some of Simony’s sketches with him for
further study.5 By the end of their meeting, the count had invited Simony to
draw up a proposal for a university chair in this new field of study, “physical
geography” (Erdkunde).
As we have seen, geography was one among several disciplines after 1848
that aimed to survey the vaunted multiplicity of the Habsburg lands and to
present its findings to the public in the form of maps, atlases, panoramas, and
museum displays. To this end, Habsburg geography was in search of new visual
techniques. How could a representation of this territory produce an impression
of overarching coherence while highlighting small-scale variability? How, for
instance, could a single map do justice both to the topographical extremes of
the Alps and the subtle gradations of the Hungarian flatlands? If the mathematical conundrum of squaring the circle was known in Leibniz’s day as the Problema austriacum, then we might say that the technical challenges of visualizing
“unity in diversity” became the “Austrian Problem” for the nineteenth century.
Certain solutions to this problem have become iconic. For instance, Karl
von Czoernig’s ethnographic map of Austria and Hungary applied stark color
contrasts in order to make the visual argument that the ethnic diversity of the
Monarchy reached down to such minute dimensions that no division of the
territory along national lines was conceivable. Other responses have been forgotten, such as the Hauslab and Peucker color schemes for the representation of
a broad but finely differentiated range of surface elevation, discussed below. In
climatology, the Austrian Problem resulted in statistical and cartographic methods that made it possible to visualize locally confined, short-lived phenomena
within a synthetic image of the climatic conditions of the Monarchy as a whole.
By following these innovations, we will see how the eighteenth century’s static,
regional image of climate began to give way to a dynamic and multiscalar view.

Mapping the Monarchy
It was not until the second half of the eighteenth century that maps of the
Habsburg Monarchy as a whole began to be produced domestically. Until the
eighteenth century, the Habsburgs had shown little interest in centralizing

124

Chapter Five

their power and standardizing their rule throughout their motley lands. Instead, they treated each as its own challenge, and the loyalty they inspired
among their subjects took the form of personal fealty, not territorial patriotism. Symbolic of this style of rule were the multiple crowns that the dynasty
owned— one for the Holy Roman Empire, one for Hungary, and one for Bohemia (plus lesser crowns corresponding to their smaller duchies and counties).
The early modern Habsburg rulers had relied on Dutch and then French
cartographers for overviews of their territories, while maps produced within
the Habsburg lands focused on local and regional views.
After the Habsburg and Polish-Lithuanian armies freed Vienna from the
Ottoman siege of 1683, Austria entered a new era of territorial expansion,
decisively reconquering Hungary and acquiring land in northern Italy, the
Balkan Peninsula, and Poland (though losing most of Silesia). These conquests provided an important stimulus to survey work and mapmaking.6 Still,
Austria’s loss in the Seven Years’ War (1756– 63) was blamed in part on the
lack of uniformly detailed, accurate maps of its territory, a necessity under the
new conditions of mobile warfare.7 Much of the detail of local topography was
still unknown and unrepresented, and no attempt was made to represent the
heights of hills and mountains precisely.
Soon after the close of the Seven Years’ War, the army was commissioned
to produce a new set of maps of all of Austria at 1:28,000, an unprecedented
level of detail. This project, known as the Josephine Survey, was designed for
military use. The maps remained state secrets, and only the highest-ranking
military officers had access to them.8 However, they also had civil uses. Joseph II had explicitly instructed his military cartographers in Transylvania
to record economically relevant information, including soil quality, the distribution of manufacture, and natural resources, as Madalina Valeria Veres has
shown. Joseph II used these manuscript maps to plan his travels to Hungary
and to make decisions about economic policy.9
Behind this cartographic project stood the academic discipline of cameralism, which sought to achieve autarky in part by cataloging natural resources
and investigating new processes of manufacture. While the Habsburg rulers
of the sixteenth century had collected naturalia as a stimulus to wonder and
a symbol of power, the cameralists of the eighteenth century recast the value of
natural diversity in practical terms. Unlike the naturalia collections of the Renaissance, cameralist natural knowledge was explicitly territorial, concerned
with the geographical distribution of resources. Cameralism thus helped to
focus attention on the Habsburg lands as a single territorial unit. What’s more,
cameralism helped to set Austria on the path to becoming an integrated eco-

The Face of the Empire 125

nomic entity, with its own geography of centers and peripheries. Joseph II
gradually eliminated internal tariffs, at the expense of some local producers,
but to the benefit of what he now called “the totality that is the monarchy.”10
Although ordinary Habsburg subjects never saw the new military maps
of the Josephine era, they experienced the shift to a territorial conception of
the Monarchy in other ways. As in Revolutionary France, centralization involved both the standardization of measurements and the rationalization of
internal borders. Thus Maria Theresa introduced the Viennese post mile in
1756, which remained the standard measure of distance until the introduction
of the metric system in 1871. In addition, the medieval tax system, based on
an overlapping patchwork of feudal domains, was gradually remade as a uniform, continuous overlay of cadastral municipalities (Kadastergemeinde). The
borders of these municipalities were drawn according to visible, natural landmarks, such as trees, hills, rivers, or boundary stones, in some cases diverging
significantly from the human geography of a region. Of all the new internal
divisions imposed by the centralizing state of the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries, these municipal borders remained the most palpable to
Habsburg citizens up until the reforms of 1848 and 1867. They marked “on one
hand the radius of self-governance and, on the other hand, the space in which
each citizen was granted the right of residence.” Surprisingly, however, this
municipal grid was not inscribed on any map in the Josephine era; that project
was not completed until 1861.11 In short, spatial experiences of the Monarchy
were changing, but in ways that were only beginning to be recorded visually.
From the 1780s Austria saw a boom in mapmaking, due to several factors,
including the relaxation of censorship under Joseph II, which boosted the
publishing industry; the success of Joseph’s economic policies, which created
a merchant class with money to spend on printed materials; and the founding
of an engravers’ academy in Vienna in 1768. Consider that between 1700 and
1779 only three hundred maps were published in the Austrian lands, while
three hundred were produced between 1786 and 1790 alone. Among these
maps were views of the newly acquired territories of Galicia and Bukovina, as
well as of the Banat, Hungary’s military border zone.12
The earliest published maps of the modern Monarchy as a whole reflected
the eighteenth-century expansion of transport and communication.13 Among
these were representations of postal routes or Postkarten, in the original sense
of the term. A 1782 postal map of the Habsburg lands (see figure 15) was festooned with an image of carriages driving down a winding road, which fades
into the distance near the empire’s southwest corner, as if inviting the viewer
on a tour.14 In a similar spirit, a 1785– 86 map depicted a projected system of

126

Chapter Five

F i g u r e 1 5 . Post-Charte der Kaiserl. Königl. Erblanden, by Georg Ignaz von Metzburg,
detail, 1782.

canals that would connect Austria’s major rivers, intended to “facilitate circulation” domestically and with foreign lands.15 The plan itself turned out to be
unworkable, because the engineer had little sense of the actual elevations in the
Alps and Carpathians. Nonetheless, maps like these drew attention to the real
and potential circulation of people, commodities, and information.
The late eighteenth century also saw the first cartographic representations
of “the products of nature and industry,” or what we would call economic
maps of the Habsburg lands. As the Wiener Zeitung observed of the map in figure 16, “the main focus is on familiarizing a worthy public with the natural treasures and manufactured products of each province.” As this image indicates,
the effort to include all such information resulted in a map so overcrowded as
to be virtually illegible.16
Two aspects of these eighteenth-century maps are particularly noteworthy.
One is the omission of climatic information. Climate factored in these maps
only in the form of notes about terrain that might or might not be travers-

The Face of the Empire 127

F i g u r e 1 6 . Economic map of Carniola, ca. 1795.

able in a given season.17 The kinds of climatic information that would have
served agriculture or medical geography were not displayed on cartographic
overviews, because they had not yet been centrally collected. Where climatic
data was being recorded— as, for instance, by physicians working in the tradition of medical topography, or by agricultural improvement societies— it
was a local project, without provision for standardized measurements across
large regions. Second, it is evident that little attempt had been made as yet to
impose order on the proliferation of cartographic symbols. A unifying aesthetic had yet to be invented. What these maps tell us, then, is that during the
cartographic explosion of the late eighteenth century, a great deal of effort was
expended to represent the geographical distribution and impressive variety
of natural resources in the Habsburg lands. Yet there was little if any effort to
develop an appropriate visual scheme for doing so.

Wonders of the Austrian Empire
The need for such a scheme was first felt after Napoleon’s devastation of central Europe. Francis II, Holy Roman emperor, was stripped of his imperial

128

Chapter Five

crown. He was, however, allowed to don a new one. He became Francis I,
“emperor of Austria,” for the first time uniting the Habsburg hereditary lands
under a single title.18 In an effort to unite this population against Napoleon,
Francis I attempted to inculcate a new whole-state “Austrian” identity. New
publications sent out the call for contributions to a patriotic research project,
or Vaterlandskunde, which would extol the many virtues of Austria’s land and
population. This literature was designed to counter not only defamations by
the French, but also the more narrowly provincial forms of patriotism that
Napoleon’s occupation had enflamed. The new Vaterlandskunde developed
what Werner Telesko has aptly called an “encyclopedic aesthetic.”19
Among its early fruits were celebratory volumes such as Marvels of the
Lands and Peoples of the Austrian Empire (1809) and Natural Wonders of the
Austrian Empire (1811).20 Both volumes were due to Franz Sartori, who was
a writer and editor by profession and a naturalist by avocation. In his later
years, while editor of the Vaterländische Blätter, Sartori undertook a survey
of “Austrian” literature, by which he meant “not merely that of the Germans,”
but also “all the various peoples, whose language and education are advanced
enough that they possess a literature.” These included “the Bohemians and
Moravians, the Slovaks and Poles, the Russniaks (in Galicia and Hungary),
the Serbs (in Hungary, Slavonia, and Dalmatia), the Croatians, the Winds (in
inner Austria and western Hungary), the National-Hungarians or Magyars,
the Jews and Greeks.” Others— “such as Wallachians, Armenians, Gypsies,
Clementines, and Ottomans”— had not yet reached the point of having their
“own” literature, but (Sartori implied) might one day be included in such
a compilation. Sartori described this project as a continuation of the long
Habsburg tradition of patronage for the sciences. He set before the reader
“the intellectual output of a population of 32 million people, the centuries-long
cultural history of the diverse Austrian nations . . . brought into full view in one
grand image.”21 In this way, he suggested that the scholarly work of the cultural
nationalist movements of the early nineteenth century could in fact ground a
new Habsburg-loyal discourse.
In short, Vaterlandskunde developed hand in hand with provincial Landeskunde. It was an umbrella discipline, both natural-scientific and humanistic. Its encyclopedic style attempted to fold the proliferation of research on
places and peoples into one aesthetically pleasing image of Habsburg “unity
in diversity.” It was both a “political-administrative” undertaking, a means of
rendering the population and territory legible to government, and an aestheticideological pursuit, cultivating an appreciation for the varied “wonders” of the
Habsburg lands.

The Face of the Empire 129

But Vaterlandskunde remained a marginal enterprise in Sartori’s lifetime.
What catapulted it to the fore were the revolutionary events of 1848– 49. Facing the challenge of modern, popular nationalist movements, Habsburg-loyal
intellectuals began to shape a supranational ideology for a new age. Liberals
agreed that, politically, the state would need to strike a fine balance between
centralization and decentralization, building a common legal and economic
framework and a shared “Austrian” identity, but also allowing for local autonomy. To quote the liberal statesman Victor Franz Freiherr von AndrianWerburg, the goal was the “preservation of provincial differences, without
harm to the unity of the whole.”22

V i s ua l i z i n g t h e F at h e r l a n d
Central to the development of Vaterlandskunde as an aesthetic enterprise was
the vision of Friedrich Simony. Having been invited by Minister von Thun to
design a program of study for physical geography, Simony sent his proposal off
to the education ministry in February 1851. Physical geography as a discipline
at Habsburg universities would be responsible for a unified representation of
the natural diversity of the Monarchy as a whole:
The author is convinced above all of the need to present the subject consistently with as much possible reference to the rich evidence that the natural
diversity of the Austrian lands itself offers. A vivid depiction in word and image of the most interesting and instructive natural phenomena of the different
regions of the empire, derived from direct observation, will not fail to achieve
the desired effect of awakening love and enthusiasm for the great, beautiful,
united Fatherland. Travels to individual parts of the Monarchy seem to the
author to be an essential part of the responsibilities of this professorship, so
that the lecturer can gradually acquire the desired first-hand observations and
simultaneously collect the material that will permit a fruitful presentation of
the subject.23

In these lines we can trace many of the traits that would distinguish Habsburg
physical geography in the decades to come. First, there is the patriotic value
attached to it, keyed to the political circumstances of the aftermath of 1848.
We hear, too, echoes of the program of Vaterlandskunde that had taken shape
earlier, in the wake of the Napoleonic Wars, with its panoramic eye for the
natural marvels of the Habsburg lands. At the same time, we find the outline
of a research program, one that stresses firsthand knowledge of the “individual

130

Chapter Five

parts” of the Monarchy— knowledge that can only be acquired through scientific travel and the patronage of natural historical collections. Finally, Simony
refers to the need for “vivid” (lebendig) representations of natural phenomena
“in word and image” (durch Wort und Bild). These keywords invoked a pedagogical principle that was rapidly gaining ground at the time. In Austria it was
associated with a wave of interest among Bohemian patriots in the writings
of the seventeenth-century heretic Jan amos Komensky, or Comenius, who
had argued for the pedagogical value of visual aids. Simony elaborated that
these “vivid” representations would take the form of “panoramas and profiles,
characteristic landscapes and images of individual natural historical points of
interest or objects, then too graphical representations of various kinds,” all of
which would need to be assembled and perfected for use as accompaniments
to scientific lectures.24 Simony was firm about the requirements for such visual
aids: they would need to be produced on a grand scale to be suitable for public
presentations, on wall-sized sheets of paper, and should be kept in their own
archives to protect them. In order to allow himself time to produce such an
ambitious set of illustrations, Simony requested that his lectures be kept to a
minimum. Remarkably, Thun agreed. Simony would be permitted to teach
only in the winter semester and to take leave from teaching whenever he might
need to.25
Ironically, Simony never took advantage of this freedom to explore the territory of the Monarchy beyond the Alps, Bohemia, and Carniola. Not even
the Carpathians tempted him. Although he helped to articulate a vision of
imperial science for the postrevolutionary era, he was a product of an earlier
generation, and his own scientific interests remained focused on the natural
history of the Alps.
Nonetheless, he developed exquisite solutions to the Austrian Problem.
Most of the meteorological maps and diagrams with which Simony illustrated
his lectures were too large to be published and have since been lost. But many
of his meticulously observed landscape paintings and drawings have survived
(see figure 17 and plate 2). These demonstrate his innovative methods for capturing fine-grained detail within compositions that are, nonetheless, clearly
legible as foreground, middle ground, and background. The only thing more
remarkable than the level of detail in Simony’s Alpine panoramas is how he
managed to maintain the sense of depth. Albrecht Penck, Simony’s successor
as chair of physical geography at Vienna, noted that Simony achieved this effect in part by choosing his standpoint appropriately, in part by sketching the
foreground in bolder strokes, the background in finer lines. He found that he
could make the background retreat by filling it with so much detail that it grew

The Face of the Empire 131

F i g u r e 1 7 . Markt Aussee, Styria, undated drawing by Friedrich Simony. Note the numbers
that identify the finely drawn distant peaks.

darker.26 Photography could not achieve the same effect, and so Simony often
added details to the backgrounds of his landscape photographs.
Simony’s techniques, while keyed to his scientific goals, also reflected
the rise of plein air painting in Austria. The art historian Thomas Hellmuth
suggests that a defining feature of Austrian Biedermeier art was its attention
to natural detail, combined with the effect of a unified, all-at-once aesthetic
impression. Hellmuth points, for instance, to the country scenes painted by
Ferdinand Georg Waldmuller in the 1830s and 1840s, including those painted
in Simony’s favorite corner of the Alps.27 A particular ambition of these artists
was to capture the nuanced, fleeting effects created by changes in the atmosphere.28 Simony addressed the relationship between landscape painting and
meteorology in a series of popular lectures. He aimed to convince his audience
that the atmosphere deserved the painter’s closest attention. “How charmless,
how dull land and sea would appear . . . if the whole endless diversity of meteorological processes did not bring drama and variety to the scenery.” Atmospheric changes could transform a landscape in dramatic ways. For instance,
visibility increased sharply on the coldest of winter days, as he knew from the
stretch of seventy-two hours he had spent on a three-thousand-meter-high Alpine peak in February 1847, when “Alpine peaks twenty and more miles away

132

Chapter Five

displayed clear outlines and even individual details of their forms.”29 In the
course of these lectures, Simony explained such technical concepts as the difference between absolute and relative humidity, the thermodynamics behind
rising air currents, and the classification of clouds. He was, in effect, teaching his audience to see the atmosphere not as mere backdrop but rather as
the scene of dramatic confrontations between warmer and colder, wetter and
drier air currents. Even the most fleeting features of a landscape, the clouds,
depended on the “interaction of the temperature, humidity, and movements
of the layers of the atmosphere, on the position of the sun, the composition of
the earth’s surface, and the vegetative cover of the land.”30
The novelist Adalbert Stifter brought Simony’s aesthetic lessons to an even
wider public. The protagonist of Stifter’s Nachsommer, evidently modeled
on Simony, learns that he was wrong to eliminate the optical effects of the
atmosphere from his landscapes. His mentor teaches him to see what he had
previously tried to ignore:
Thanks to my friend’s critique, it suddenly dawned on me that I had to observe and acquaint myself with something that until then had always appeared
to me as insignificant. Objects take on another appearance due to air, light,
mist, clouds, and nearby objects; this I had to fathom, and I had to take the
causes as the subject of my research, as I had previously taken the things that
immediately strike the eye. In this way it would be possible to succeed in
representing objects that swim in a medium and in an environment of other
bodies.31

Simony and Stifter thus taught a wide audience to see the atmosphere as a
connecting medium and as a dynamic element of the landscape. These were
essential contributions to the visual repertoire of Austrian Vaterlandskunde.

The Geological Eye
Geology was the first field to confront the Austrian Problem head on. The
Royal-Imperial Mining Museum (Montanistisches Museum), founded in Vienna
in 1814, consolidated minerals and gems that had previously been arranged
haphazardly in princely Wunderkammer, reorganizing them along modern
geographic lines. This demanded knowledge of the spatial distribution of
minerals across the Habsburg lands. What was needed was a standardized,
uniform “geognostic” map— one depicting areas defined by their principal
type of rock— for the Habsburg territory as a whole.

The Face of the Empire 133

The production of the first such map was directed by Wilhelm Haidinger
and completed in 1845. He constructed it on the basis of existing regional
maps, supplemented by his own field research. His account of this process is
revealing: “Every more detailed map displays differences in the composition
of rocks that are locally of great importance, but which disappear at lower
magnification, assimilated to one or another neighboring formation.”32 For the
geologist to whom such local variations mattered, the result was long, needless
labor in the field to recover the lost details. The job of the geological mapmaker was thus to judge the significance of local details for the representation
of larger geological structures. In this sense, Haidinger’s project can be seen
as a forerunner to the global geological synthesis achieved a generation later
by Eduard Suess— who, in 1850, was still a university student working part
time for Haidinger at the imperial mineral collection. Thus Haidinger faced
the problem of choosing an appropriate scale for his imperial overview: “The
highly non-uniform composition of the Monarchy, the important mountain
chains on one side, the great Hungarian plain on the other, all seemed to demand a different treatment. Variation on one hand, uniformity on the other,
demanded a different scale for the same overview.” Indeed, the complexity of
the geological strata in Bohemia, South Tyrol, and mining regions would not
permit of too coarse a scale. And yet the map could not be produced in too
many leaves, for it was intended to “reach a wide public by means of a low
price”— not least in order to stimulate further research.33 Haidinger eventually
decided on 1:840,000, which was the scale of the road map published by the
Imperial-Royal Military Geographical Institute.
Haidinger presented the 1845 map as a work in progress, a baseline for
further investigation. He fully hoped that members of the public would apply
their local knowledge to the task and supply him with corrections. Indeed, he
had presented his early drafts of the map to colleagues at regional scientific
societies throughout the Monarchy, in order to obtain critiques and revisions.
As he made clear, a geological overview could only emerge from the closest
cooperation between provincial societies and a central institute. The future
of Habsburg science hinged, in his eyes, on centralizing the production of
knowledge partially but not completely. He therefore invited “all friends of
the geological knowledge of our land” to submit additions and corrections.34
One of the first major undertakings of the Imperial Geological Institute
upon its founding in 1849 was to replace Haidinger’s 1845 map with a truly
uniform cartographic overview of the geology of the Habsburg lands. Thus by
1863 the geology of “the entire territory of Austria-Hungary, from Lombardy
[sic] to Bukovina, from Dalmatia to the Elbe gap” had been mapped at a scale

134

Chapter Five

F i g u r e 1 8 . “Geological Map of Austria-Hungary, on the Basis of the Survey of the RoyalImperial Geological Institute,” by Franz von Hauer, 1867.

of 1:144.000.35 The importance of this achievement was that it enlarged the
field of study beyond an individual crown land. Already in the course of his
survey work in the 1840s, Haidinger had begun to think like an imperial-royal
scientist, to see continuities that could not be grasped within a narrower field
of view: “One could deal with one crownland after the other. But the nature of
mountains makes such a division along artificial borders untenable.” Haidinger
insisted that the greater part of Austria was dominated by one “mountain system,” including both the Alps and Carpathians, the unity of which must be
made visible. Here was a novel, coherent, and majestic vision of the physical
structure of the Monarchy.36

C l i m at i c C a rto g r a p h y
Many of the obstacles to producing a geological overview of Austria had counterparts in the mapping of climate. But the challenge was compounded because the climatic map was an entirely new genre. Until the nineteenth century,
climate zones had been drawn based simply on latitude. In 1817 Alexander
von Humboldt introduced isotherms as a means of representing the empirical
distribution of climate across the earth. Isotherms are lines connecting points
of equal temperature, a graphic method of interpolating temperature between
locations at which it has been measured. Nineteenth-century scientists appre-

The Face of the Empire 135

F i g u r e 1 9 . First map of global isotherms, ca. 1823.

ciated how much isotherms revealed at a glance. In the form of closed circles,
they indicate a region of elevated temperature; where the lines bunch together,
temperature changes rapidly over a short distance.37 Humboldt, however, was
working with very limited data: fifty-eight stations for the entire surface of the
earth, of which only two lay in Asia and Africa (see figure 19).
Isothermal maps became more realistic later in the nineteenth century, as
observing networks grew denser and more extensive, and as new methods
for analyzing and representing their data were introduced. In 1848 Heinrich
Dove published a world map of temperature distribution with data from nine
hundred stations, and in 1864 a new one drawing on two thousand stations
worldwide. Maps of climate also began to represent factors other than temperature.38 Alphonse de Candolle and Wladimir Köppen introduced influential climate-classification systems based on the distribution of vegetation, while
Albrecht Penck devised one based on humidity. As more data became available, competing schemes emerged, each suited to different applications, from
plant geography to geology to human biogeography. Yet classifications like
these— based on individual meteorological factors or on the effects of climate
on living things— were occasionally criticized for attending to climate’s effects
rather than its “essence.”39 The Habsburg physical geographer Alexander

136

Chapter Five

Supan attempted to get at that essence. He distinguished “continental” from
“oceanic” regions according to the average annual range of temperature (the
difference between the temperatures of the warmest and coldest months).
Nonetheless, Supan acknowledged that no classification scheme could ever
be absolute.40
What all these schemes had in common was the absence of weather. They
represented climate as a static variable, a long-term average, in which phenomena on the time scale of weather— clouds, storms, and gales— were invisible.
How could the dynamic nature of climate be made manifest? How could a
single map represent a temporally and spatially fluctuating phenomenon?41

An Atlas of the Habsburg World
By 1898, when Austria-Hungary celebrated the fiftieth year of Emperor Franz
Josef ’s reign, Habsburg field scientists could look back on the previous half
century with pride. The efflorescence of topography, geology, seismology, hydrography, climatology, botany, zoology, and ethnography in this period had
succeeded in “placing applied geography on a scientific footing.”42 The result
of all this activity was an overload of information and the need for new approaches to the Austrian Problem.
Between 1882 and 1887, Eduard Hölzel’s printing house in Vienna brought
out the first thematic atlas of Austria-Hungary. It was a pioneering work, applying innovative methods for visualizing physical geographic and demographic
(“statistical”) data.43 Even after the life of the Monarchy, this atlas would
continue to be cited as a crucial source of demographic information on the
region— as “still the best cartographic introduction to Austrian problems.”44
The atlas opened with a series of maps of the distribution of temperature and
rainfall, presenting these as the most fundamental scheme for the division of
the Monarchy into natural regions. Two classifications were proposed: one,
based on temperature (see plate 3), identified twenty-two “natural climatic
regions”; another, based on rainfall, distinguished seven such zones. From
climatology the atlas moved on to hydrography, geology, and vegetation, and
from there to various demographic and ethnographic maps. The later maps
refer back to the earlier ones in order to emphasize the interdependence of
environmental and human factors. For instance, Josef Chavanne’s “Forest
Map” referred the reader back to the maps of elevation, geology, rainfall, and
temperature, and also ahead to the maps of economic production, in order to
grasp the variety of factors determining the distribution of forest cover. The
atlas facilitated the appreciation of these connections by imposing a uniform

The Face of the Empire 137

design. Of twenty-five maps in total, nineteen were drawn at 1:2,5000,000,
sixteen at 1:5,000,000. Related if not identical color schemes were used
throughout. German toponyms were used where available, and the keys and
explanations were exclusively in German. Amusingly, one double-page spread
presented four uniformly scaled and colored maps of the Monarchy, illustrating the distribution of towns, hail fall, illiterates, and pigs. As the text accompanying the map of elevations explained, “Austria-Hungary in particular is a
country in which one can clearly follow the interactions between the physical
conditions of the land and the physical-cultural conditions of the populace;
in both ways, the complex structure of the land offers a diversity of conditions
of development and formation.”45 According to this logic, the representation
of fine gradations of physical-geographic features might also allow for a more
nuanced appreciation of cultural variation.
But how could a small-scale map (that is, one representing a large area of
the earth on a small sheet of paper) encapsulate all the relevant local detail?
How, for instance, was one to represent elevation on a map that encompassed
the towering heights of the Alps and the flat expanse of the Hungarian plain?
One might choose a scheme to capture the dramatic contrasts between peaks
and valleys, on one hand, or one sensitive to small variations in altitude, on the
other. But could both goals be achieved at once? Here was a classic instance of
the Austrian Problem, and the 1887 atlas exhibited some of the more ingenious
solutions to it.
At the time, there were several methods in use for representing elevation.
Hatching— shading by means of fine lines— was the oldest, and it had become
a speedier process thanks to the substitution of lithography for copper engraving around 1800. Contour lines had also been in use since the late eighteenth
century. A slightly newer technique was the profile, or horizontal cross-section,
developed for physical geography by Alexander von Humboldt.46 Austrian
cartographers chose instead to illustrate elevations by means of color. They
were responding in part to popular demand for more accurate maps of the
Alps. Using a range of colors could give an immediate visual impression of
elevation, particularly for coarser-grained overviews. The goal was “plasticity,”
meaning a visual effect of three-dimensionality. The first such scheme to be
widely used was developed by Franz von Hauslab (1798– 1883), a military cartographer in Vienna. According to Hauslab’s rules, colors should be layered
from lighter to darker with increasing altitude, with each tint clearly distinguished from the previous one in the series. This system was put into practice by cartographers in Vienna and Prague, including Friedrich Simony, and
their maps circulated widely in school atlases and wall maps of the Habsburg

138

Chapter Five

lands. By contrast, elevation maps in Wilhelmine Germany tended to use a
simple two-color scheme, green for lowlands, brown for mountains.47 The
1887 atlas of Austria-Hungary employed Hauslab’s color scheme for elevation,
deviating only in the choice of pale blue for the highest peaks, the realm of
eternal frost.
It was not simply the application of color that distinguished the Austrian
experiments in mapping elevation; it was the depth of theoretical engagement
with the problem of representing vertical scale. A competing system was developed in the 1890s by Karl Peucker, a geographer from Prussian Silesia who
worked for a Vienna publishing house. Drawing on research on the physics,
psychology, and physiology of color perception, Peucker invented a color
scheme that, he argued, gave a more lifelike impression of elevation. While
Hauslab had advised darker colors for higher areas, Peucker called for “richer”
colors, according to his own definition of richness. He also gave cartographers a more precise vocabulary by distinguishing between two priorities: 1)
Meßbarkeit or measurability— that is, the degree to which relative magnitudes
on the map corresponded to the relative magnitudes of the objects they represented; and 2) Anschaulichkeit or visualizability, the degree to which relative
magnitudes on the map strike the eye as standing in the same proportion to
each other as the real-world objects. Peucker’s system was highly influential
within and beyond Austria-Hungary. In 1913 it was adopted for use by the
International Map of the World, translating a solution to visualizing the supranational state into a key to representing the globe.48
The Austrian Problem was not confined to elevation maps. The 1887 atlas
of Austria-Hungary showed how it cut clear across what we would call physical and human geography. The political stakes were highest for the map of
language use. Produced by Franz le Monnier and based on statistics from the
1880 census, this map went furthest in the application of color to visualize
local variation. Von Czoernig’s 1855 ethnographic map had only represented
the dominant language for each municipality. Le Monnier observed that it had
thereby neglected “smaller minorities.” His solution was to apply multiple colors to a linguistically mixed municipality: colored dots represented a minority
language spoken by 10– 29 percent of the population, while stripes stood for
a language spoken by 30– 50 percent. This representational choice had clear
political implications: Germans now appeared to be “not only the numerically
strongest nation, but also the most widely distributed.”49 Le Monnier accentuated this effect by using pink not only to represent German speakers but also
to draw political borders. His map, however, was an outlier, the only one to
suggest that Habsburg unity derived from German culture.

The Face of the Empire 139

Other maps in the atlas instead carried the message that unity arose from
conditions of mutual dependence deriving from environmental circumstances.
Consider the map of river basins. Read in conjunction with the rest of the
atlas, this map illustrated the role of physical factors like geomorphology and
climate in shaping the waterways of Austria-Hungary “in their character as
factors in commerce and transport.” The accompanying text underlined the
impressive variety of conditions of elevation, geology, temperature, and vegetation along the Danube. “To the degree to which these elements either in their
extremes or in their various degrees enter into a local relationship of mutual
dependence— to that degree the hydrographic effect will also vary.” The map
thus displayed the factors influencing hydrography “both individually and in
their connections and mutual dependence.” Its goal, then, was to represent local
variations, both natural and human, as interdependent parts within a greater
whole. It achieves this effect by depicting more than half of the Monarchy as
lying within the Danube basin, uniformly shaded blue. Smaller regions defined by the Danube’s tributaries are indicated only by text, so as not to break
up the unifying effect of that blue expanse. In this way, the map subsumed
the diversity of hydrographic conditions along the Danube to the unifying
concept— and uniform image— of “the largest river basin in Europe.”50

“But Enough of Isotherms”
The 1887 atlas of Austria-Hungary included seven climatic maps: three for
temperature and four for precipitation. All display a particularly thorny instance of the Austrian Problem: how to depict overall climatic patterns by
means of data coming from stations influenced by very different local conditions. This was a defining challenge of scientific internationalization, which
Habsburg scientists addressed within the borders of their own state.
Indeed, the job of drawing isotherms brought the Austrian problem to the
fore. In mountain ranges, small-scale climatic variations thwart the tactics of
large-scale climatology. In particular, the change in temperature with height
is on the order of one thousand times greater than the horizontal variation in
temperature. Saussure made the first measurements of the decrease of temperature with height in the Alps in the eighteenth century, but had not been
able to discover a universal law. Julius Hann had applied thermodynamics to
this question in the 1860s, reasoning that rising air expands as it ascends into
regions of lower pressure and loses heat in the process. But this decrease in
temperature (known as the lapse rate) did not appear to be uniform. When
Josef Chavanne constructed the first map of isotherms in Austria-Hungary

140

Chapter Five

in 1871, he concluded that “the law of the temperature decrease with height
has by no means been determined.”51 Subsequently, mountain observatories, kites, and balloons indicated that the lapse rate varies from one region
to another and  from one season to another. “But enough of isotherms,”
one Austrian climatologist exclaimed in 1909. “The task of the climatographer is more narrowly circumscribed and is supposed to describe real
conditions.”52
For the 1887 atlas of Austria-Hungary, Chavanne therefore abandoned the
method of reduction—which “can furnish only tenuous values”—and with it
the drawing of isotherms. Instead, he used colored closed curves, modeled
on the Hauslab color scheme for elevation, to show the average temperature
distribution in different seasons, without reduction to sea level (see plate 3).
Alexander Supan had set a precedent for this in 1880, when he was working
with data in part from stations on high plateaus. He had sought a standard correction in order to reduce the measurements to sea level. Depending on season, however, he found that this correction would have to be positive in some
cases and negative in others. He therefore chose to use uncorrected values,
which “allow the law of the horizontal distribution of the annual fluctuation
of temperature to emerge in the clearest way.”53 What a map like this revealed
was that the more important geographical influence on temperature was not
absolute height but the relative height of mountains with respect to valleys.
At the time, some isothermal maps had begun to display the influence of land
and sea, bending warmer contours inland, for instance.54 But few attempts had
been made to visualize the influence of orography. As Chavanne observed, the
effect of elevation on temperature depends less on absolute height above sea
level than on the relative height of mountains and valleys— hence his omission
of contour lines. The lowest average temperatures were found in valleys where
mountains blocked the influx of warm air from the south and west. In other
words, Chavanne’s statistical and cartographic methods began to make visible
climate dynamics—specifically, how the form of the earth’s surface modifies
atmospheric motions.
The goal of visualizing climate dynamics is evident in another of Chavanne’s maps for the atlas, the distribution of days with storms. Earlier maps
of storm distribution had tabulated stations reporting the same number of
storms, then divided Europe rather crudely into regions of summer storms,
winter storms, and, in the east, a region without winter storms.55 Chavanne’s
map was constructed along entirely different lines, since he intended it to
display the dynamics of storm generation, not merely their frequency. It re-

The Face of the Empire 141

veals local contrasts that were obscured by the older maps. By keeping local
variations in focus, the map makes visible the dynamics of storm generation,
not merely their frequency. Namely, it reveals the influence of topography on
storms; Vienna, for example, displayed a greater storm frequency than Wiener Neustadt, because circular valleys open to the south were more prone to
storms than their surroundings.
Remarkably, Hann achieved a similarly dynamic effect in his Atlas of Meteorology (1887) by means of an entirely different method. Hann constructed
his map of global isotherms (see figure 20) by omitting data from high-altitude
stations and reducing all temperatures to sea level, employing a lapse rate of
0.5 degrees per one hundred meters. He justified these choices in detail in
the text accompanying the maps. It might appear to be a disadvantage that
elevations with a more gradual lapse rate would appear warmer than their
surroundings, while those with a steeper lapse rate would appear cooler. But
this was not a problem in Hann’s eyes. According to Hann’s definition, isotherms were meant to represent the temperature of the lowest layer of the
atmosphere— “since valleys are the most commonly inhabited part of the
earth’s surface.”56 In other words, isotherms were supposed to represent climate in its significance for human life. Yet Hann also wanted his isotherms to
illustrate the dynamic effects of mountains on temperature. As he explained,
mountains could potentially have a warming effect by shielding against cold
winds; or they might have a cooling influence, either by preventing the outflow
of air that had undergone radiation cooling, or by shielding against warmer
air currents from the sea. The point was to be able to see these orographic
influences on the map, to visualize how mountains diverted air currents and
redistributed heat. To do so, Hann argued, required a uniform lapse rate.
What was visible on Hann’s map, then, was the real influence of mountains
on the distribution of temperature, by which he meant their dynamic effect.
So, for instance, on the map of January isotherms one could see an extreme
cold island in Siberia that was characteristic of the valleys during anticyclonic
conditions, with a high-pressure center above. The Russian climatologist Alexander Voeikov objected that this cold island was an illusion, since the air in
the mountains was significantly warmer than in the valleys when anticyclonic
conditions prevailed. Hann disagreed, seeing the cold island as a genuine
feature of the climate and insisting that valley temperatures were those most
relevant to human life. “These are in reality relatively cooler or warmer parts
of the earth’s surface, and it seems to me positively advantageous that maps of
isotherms express these conditions.”57

142

Chapter Five

F i g u r e 2 0 . “January Isotherms,” by Julius Hann. In Atlas der Meteorologie (1887). Compare
to the 1823 map (figure 19); note how Hann’s isotherms bend according to local conditions.
Note, too, the cold island over Siberia, explained in the text.

Conclusion
When constructing a climate map from station data, a basic question is how to
evaluate the significance of measured differences of temperature and pressure
between neighboring locations. Do these reflect actual variation, or are they
artifacts of differences in the measurement process? So, for instance, in his
study of the daily course of temperature in Austria, Josef Valentin insisted that
elsewhere “in Europe it is not easy to find meteorological stations situated in
such diverse conditions as in Austria.”58 Valentin noted that Heinrich Wild’s
study, Temperature Conditions in the Russian Empire, had omitted data from
the Habsburg stations in Vienna, Prague, Salzburg, and Kraków for this reason. Valentin did not dispute Wild’s judgment, but he believed that “these
locally influenced temperatures are indeed not without value.” He argued
further that the Austrian data could not be treated with the methods used for
Russia. Although corrections based simply on latitude and longitude might

The Face of the Empire 143

have sufficed for the “more uniform orographic conditions of the Russian Empire,” it was “obviously not to be considered for Austria, with its highly varied
surface forms.”59 In this way, the influence of topography on daily temperature
variations could become an object of study in its own right.
In short, the goal of doing justice to Austria’s physical diversity lent significance to measurements that might otherwise have been dismissed as anomalous. Habsburg scientists saw the Austrian climate through the lens of the
Austrian Idea. They believed this territory to be uniquely diverse, so they
produced statistical and cartographical methods that were adequate to visualizing that diversity. Thus Hann gave credence to divergent measurements from
nearby stations in cases where he was able to find a dynamical explanation for
those differences in terms of local geography.
Look again at Hann’s map of global isotherms. How is it to be read historically? From one perspective, it is a stage in the development of our current
digital models of climate change. It displays empirical data essential to modeling the earth’s energy budget, and it was in fact put to this purpose by a
researcher in Prague during the First World War.60 Hann, however, intended it
not as data to be fed into a calculating machine, but as a form of visual communication. This map was meant to be legible at multiple scales, conveying both
global patterns and local peculiarities. Indeed, for Hann, the laborious work of
standardizing measurements from across the world served the higher purpose
of being able to visualize the dynamics of climate at multiple scales— as determined by planetary-scale forces and by the local forms of the earth’s surface.
Strategies of visual representation are thus part of the story of the shift to a
new understanding of climate in the late nineteenth century: from climate as a
fixed feature of portions of the earth’s surface to climate as a dynamic system
of energy transport across scales.

Chapter 6

The Invention of Climatography

In 1901, the Austrian Academy of Sciences celebrated the fiftieth anniversary
of the ZAMG. The festivities took place in typical imperial-royal fashion in the
ornate auditorium of the Academy of Sciences.1 Archduke Rainer, the academy’s honorary curator, delivered the opening remarks and then turned the
floor over to Wilhelm von Hartel, the liberal minister of education. It was Hartel’s privilege to announce the ambitious new project of the ZAMG. Its fifty
years of observational data would “soon appear in a monumental work, which
will give a detailed picture of the climate of the so varied parts of our kingdom,
for the benefit of all.”2 This chapter is concerned with the literary ambition
behind this project— the dream of doing justice to these “varied parts” while
producing a coherent description of the kingdom as a whole.
Seventeen volumes of this “monumental work” were planned in all, for each
of which the ZAMG received a subvention of 2,000 crowns from the ministry
of education, roughly the annual income of a domestic servant in one of the
major cities of the empire.3 Over the next eighteen years— the final ones of the
Habsburg Monarchy— the imperial Academy of Sciences oversaw the publication of the first nine volumes. In 1918, the education ministry declared that
it would continue the publication of the remaining volumes, with the enduring
goal of producing a unified conception of the defunct monarchy.4 Two lingering volumes emerged from the Academy of Sciences of the Austrian Republic
in 1927 and 1930— ironically, in step with Robert Musil’s satirical tribute to
the imperial past in the first volume of The Man without Qualities (1930).
Despite its initial pretensions, then, the series ultimately could not claim comprehensiveness. One volume, titled The Austrian Coastal Land, only got as

The Invention of Climatography 145
T a b l e 1 . Volumes in the Klimatographie von Österreich Series,
1904– 1919
Province

Author

Year

Niederösterreich
Kustenland (Triest)
Steiermark
Tirol und Vorarlberg
Salzburg
Kärnten
Bukowina
Mähren und Schlesien
Oberösterreich

J. v. Hann
E. Mazelle
R. Klein
H. v. Ficker
A. Fessler
V. Conrad
V. Conrad
H. Schindler
P. T. Schwarz

1904
1908
1909
1909
1912
1913
1917
1918
1919

Related Climatographical Studies of Habsburg Provinces after 1919
Kustenland
Wien

E. Biel
A. Wagner

1927
1930

far as Triest. During the war, the volume on Carniola was abandoned due to
insufficient funding; Bukovina was published in the absence of data lying in
enemy hands; and Moravia together with Silesia was squeezed out in 1918,
but Bohemia never appeared, apparently because Prague refused to return the
materials to Vienna after 1918. Galicia, insufficiently furnished with observatories, was also absent.5 Clearly, the coverage was spotty and skewed toward the
empire’s Alpine lands, reflecting the greater density of the observing network
in that region, scientific interest in the Alps, and the professed difficulty of
finding suitable local authors in the “periphery.” (See table 1.) Most glaring,
however, was the absence of the projected final volume, an overview “of the
climatic conditions, peculiarities, and contrasts, as well as the weather patterns of all of Austria.”6 Such a volume would have had to analyze data from
roughly four hundred observing stations and approximately 241,000 square
miles, stretching from the dry plains of Bukovina to the snowcapped peaks of
Vorarlberg to the islands off the Adriatic coast. It would have been the most
ambitious project of empirical climatology to date.7
Climate, as Julius Hann liked to observe, is a statistical abstraction. What
relationship did it bear to weather, the object of our direct experience? How
could static average values be made to reveal the dynamic processes that gave
rise to them? These quandaries also constituted a literary challenge, a problem
of genre. Genres— such as atlases, travel narratives, or nature writing— allow

146

Chapter Six

new information to be sorted and digested. They provide frameworks that
generally conform to expectations and yet are flexible enough to be adapted
to new purposes. They are generative of meaning, producing an effect that is
“deeper and more forceful than that of the explicit content of the text.”8
The term “climatography” entered the English language in 1813 and was
used in German by the 1830s (OED). It was not yet an established genre, however, because long-term, regional weather data did not become available until
the middle of the nineteenth century. No observing network before 1800 survived for more than two decades.9 Climatographies were the work above all of
the continental empires of Austria, Russia, India, and the United States. Imperial climatographies responded to the injunction to define the internal borders
of an empire’s “natural regions,” as a means of rationalizing and integrating
the economic relations of its parts. As we will see, the process of inferring
boundaries where variation was continuous required attention to phenomena
on multiple scales.10 Climatography as a genre thus held the potential to make
visible local-global interactions and patterns of change.
What follows, then, is the story of the invention of an environmental genre.
The Climatography of Austria took shape at a time when geographers were
hunting for new literary strategies. The American geomorphologist William
Morris Davis argued in 1904 that modern geography could no longer be written as if the earth were only “the home of man” and not “the home of life” in
the widest sense. He proposed the term “ontography” for “the organic half
of geography.” Ontography would be the record of the spatial distribution
of physiological responses to the environment; placed in temporal sequence,
this would become ontology, a record of “the sequence of organic responses
to a changing earth.”11 Climatography was another solution to this literary
challenge— the challenge, in Rob Nixon’s terms, of how to “plot and give figurative shape” to environmental changes “dispersed across space and time.”12
This chapter begins with the formulation of the Austrian Problem in literary terms in the 1840s and 1850s, by two men with shared backgrounds and
interests: the novelist Adalbert Stifter and the earth scientist Karl Kreil. Kreil
was seven years ahead of Stifter at the gymnasium at Kremsmunter, where
both men conceived the ambition of a career in physics. Kreil would go on to
found the ZAMG; Stifter, frustrated in his scientific aspirations, would found
a literary tradition that gave center stage to the natural world. We will see how
Kreil and Stifter each honed a written style that lavished attention on “small
things”— from the behavior of insects, to the morphology of mosses, to the
fluctuations of air pressure— but did so in ways that elucidated their significance within an imperial and a cosmic order.13 From there we will explore

The Invention of Climatography 147

the development of the genre of climatography as a solution to the Habsburg
problem of scale. To this end, it mobilized four principal points of view: that
of a central observatory, recording atmospheric phenomena as they pass into
and out of its field of vision; that of a central observer looking down from above
at the effects of atmospheric phenomena across the surface of this land; that of
coordinated observers throughout the territory, collectively turning their eyes
to the heavens; and that of an individual surveyor moving across this territory,
registering the atmosphere both mechanically and sensuously.

The Legacy of Cosmography
But first we need to consider what climatography was not. Cosmography, in
both its ancient and Renaissance forms, was a genre that blended description
of the physical and human characteristics of an environment. Recent scholarship has characterized Renaissance cosmography as a profoundly humanistic
and imaginative genre with a utopian impulse. Like its classical antecedents,
it was part natural history, part ethnography, and often took a narrative form.
By the end of the sixteenth century, cosmography effectively “dissolved”: the
disciplines of mathematical cartography, astronomical navigation, hydrography, and geodesy broke off from those of descriptive geography, ethnography,
and natural history— the former falling to the mathematical “cosmographer,”
the latter to the “chronicler.”14 Thereafter, the mathematical and descriptive
modes of environmental representation moved ever farther apart. By the late
nineteenth century, the human sciences were attempting to define their methods against those of the physical sciences. Climatography disrupted this trend
and with it the hardening distinction between explanation and understanding,
facts and values. It sought to represent— in word and image— the meanings of
meteorological measurements of a region for its human inhabitants.
In this respect, the invention of climatography bears comparison to Alexander von Humboldt’s revival of cosmography. Published in German in 1845,
Humboldt’s Cosmos: Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe came
to be seen as a model of popular science writing. Its goal was to reveal the
interdependence of all parts of the natural world. Particularly suggestive for
naturalists in the Habsburg world would have been Humboldt’s insistence on
nature’s “unity in diversity”:
Nature considered rationally, that is to say, submitted to the process of thought,
is a unity in diversity of phenomena; a harmony, blending together all created
things, however dissimilar in form and attributes; one great whole . . . animated

148

Chapter Six

by the breath of life. The most important result of a rational inquiry into nature
is, therefore, to establish the unity and harmony of this stupendous mass of
force and matter.15

Instructive too for Habsburg scientists was Humboldt’s pursuit of a literary
style that would animate rather than merely reproduce the results of empirical
measurements: “Descriptions of nature ought not to be deprived of the breath
of life. Indeed, the mere listing of general results produces just as wearying an
effect as the accumulation of too many observed details.”16 Humboldt chose,
for instance, to present the highly empirical and theoretically contested field
of terrestrial magnetism not on the basis of empirical measurements, but by
means of verbal pictures of the hypothetical causes of magnetic variation in
unseen realms within the earth and in the upper atmosphere. In these ways,
Humboldt’s “physical description of the universe” set a pattern that Habsburg
science could easily have followed.17
But this is not what happened. To be sure, imperial-royal scientists took
inspiration from Cosmos, just as Kreil’s initial geoscientific survey of the empire was inspired by Humboldt’s example. Julius Hann read all four volumes
of Cosmos as a gymnasium student in 1859, in the very spring of Humboldt’s
death, and they brought him “great pleasure,” as unfamiliar as “this manner
of serious, profound entertainment” seemed to him then. Upon beginning the
book’s fourth volume, he again relished “that warm breeze that clothed all the
earnest scientific descriptions with a light and charming scent.”18 Nonetheless,
imperial climatography would be a genre utterly distinct from Humboldtian
cosmography.
This was already clear from Hann’s rejection, in his 1883 Handbook of Climatology, of the idealism implicit in Humboldt’s definition of climate in terms
of human perceptions. To Humboldt, nature’s unity was imposed by “the eye
of the reflecting observer.” By contrast, climatography was about climate as
the shared reality of all living things. To the degree that its perspective was
anthropocentric, it was so for the sake of practical aims, not Romantic ideals.
Imperial-royal scientists seconded Humboldt’s position that many “great”
things in the universe appeared “great” only at the scale on which humans
happen to exist. But they never proposed to leave aside human interests altogether. Climatography, on the contrary, was a genre dedicated to practical
goals, appealing to a broad readership whose livelihoods depended on anticipating atmospheric conditions.
Climatography also broke with cosmography in its commitment to— some

The Invention of Climatography 149

might say obsession with— the representation of local detail. As critics at the
time pointed out, Humboldt tended to neglect local variability in the interest of
formulating universal generalizations: conclusions about volcanoes in general,
for instance, rather than about the variety of volcanic phenomena. Likewise, he
presented his botanical map of Mount Chimborazo as a universal correlation
of plant life with altitude, ignoring the distinct forms of mountain vegetation
in different regions of the world. Climatographers instead believed that local
variations mattered, even within the framework of an imperial, and ultimately
planetary, overview.
Climatography also broke new ground in its resolve to make quantitative
measurements intelligible to the public, rather than minimizing their presence
in the text. Humboldt acknowledged the pleasure that naturalists took in exact measurement, but concluded that the overemphasis on quantitative analysis made the science of his day appear “wasted” (verödet) in the eyes of the
public.19 Climatographers, on the other hand, did not doubt that they could
teach readers to extract meaning from numerical measurements.
A final, more subtle way in which Austrian climatography differed from
Humboldt’s cosmography was in the significance it attached to the use of
the German language. Humboldt, who had previously published primarily
in French, suggested that Cosmos could only have been written in his native
language. Writing in the years of nationalist agitation leading up to the Frankfurt Parliament, Humboldt took a Romantic, patriotic, even mystical view of
language: “The word is, therefore, more than the mere sign and form, and its
mysterious influence still reveals itself most strikingly where it springs among
free-minded communities, and attains its growth upon native soils.”20 By contrast, the choice to publish the Climatography of Austria in German was a
matter of expediency: German was the multilingual empire’s lingua franca. To
claim that German or any other language gave privileged access to the workings of the universe would have been anathema to the ideology of imperialroyal science. Where Humboldt assumed an ideal affinity between language
and thought, Habsburg scientists retained numbers and tables in recognition
of the limitations and opacities of words.
In short, Austrian climatography stood in uneasy proximity to Humboldtian cosmography. Both carried the message of unity in diversity, and both attempted precarious feats of scaling. Yet, in keeping with the rejection of German
idealism by many nineteenth-century Habsburg thinkers, climatography held
fast to the irreducible complexity of the local and particular, and to a quantitative precision that was meant to serve a wide variety of practical endeavors.

150

Chapter Six

The View from Saint Stephen’s
In 1844, a year before the publication of the first volume of Humboldt’s Cosmos, a book appeared in Pest with the title Vienna and the Viennese in Pictures
Drawn from Life. Its editor was the thirty-nine-year-old Adalbert Stifter, who
contributed twelve of the literary sketches, all in a breezy, irreverent, and cosmopolitan tone uncharacteristic of his later writings. Like Stifter, the other authors were not natives of Vienna, and the book was intended for those who did
not know the city well. In his preface, Stifter assured readers that the volume
they held was no dry compilation of statistics. It was, instead, an array of images “as in a kaleidoscope,” which would allow the reader gradually to “paint
an image of the life and work of this imperial residence for himself.”21 Austria’s
human and natural diversity was becoming a motif of patriotic tributes of the
1830s and 1840s, and this “kaleidoscope” presented Vienna as a microcosm of
this multiplicity. Vienna and the Viennese was an early experiment in achieving
the literary effect of a multiscalar view.
The book’s opening sketch, “The View from St. Stephen’s Cathedral,”
literally constructed an overview of the city. From this towering vantage point,
Stifter pointed out the battlefields of Aspern and Wagram, sites of an Austrian victory and subsequent defeat by Napoleon’s army. Vienna was thus
the heart of an empire that “sits in the parliament of peoples and helps to
determine the fate of planet earth.” He identified the “mighty road” that had
been built by Karl VI in the early eighteenth century over the Semmering,
through the karst, all the way to “our port Triest,” and which “connects us
to the entire South,”22 and another street, leading out from the city toward
dusty, yellow fields, the road “to Hungary and the Orient.” Stifter’s use of the
first-person plural placed the emphasis on unity. He juxtaposed aerial and
ground-level perspectives, the close-up and the distant. From above, Vienna
was “an enormous plain onto which this sea of houses spills”; from below, it
was a dense stream of “endless” streets. For the departing traveler, meanwhile,
it was merely that “tiny speck, Vienna.” Stifter’s perspective might be termed
statistical, as individuals recede and the aggregate comes into focus. And yet he
relied on a prestatistical episteme of signs and resemblances. Going about their
daily business, the Viennese did not realize that they were “blithe and lovely
letters, with which the muse writes the terrible drama of world history.” The
techniques introduced here for scaling between the individual and the social
aggregate recall older models, such as Mandeville’s descriptions of the hive in
The Fable of the Bees. They also anticipate more modern approaches, such as
Tolstoy’s scenes of Napoleonic warfare in War and Peace.

The Invention of Climatography 151

“The View from St. Stephen’s” is, above all, a view of circulation. Stifter
proposed that the city’s inhabitants were “the heartbeat of a great monarchy. . . . The blood, the simple red balm, flows happily through all the veins
of the entire body, and never suspects that it built this marvel of a body itself.”
This arterial metaphor anticipated post-1848 interpretations of Habsburg
unity as an effect of commercial “circulation.” From above, Vienna revealed
itself as the site of a confluence of streams of peoples and things, a nexus of
commerce and cultural exchange: “Things and peoples mixed in ever-denser
traffic, the rarified nervous fluid of international bonds.” The individual “neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it.” Just as commerce figures here as a source of unity, so is money a
tool of commensuration. It is the “one thing that swallows all the others up,”
the invention that makes it possible to carry a “duchy in a pocket.”
Throughout, Stifter contrasted the narrow perspective of the city dweller
down below with the wide view of the observer above. In this way, he juxtaposed divergent temporal as well as spatial scales. For the individual is also
blind to patterns that unfold on the time scale of multiple generations. “This
society builds unceasingly and diligently on a structure that it does not recognize, according to a plan that it does not know.” Stifter’s essay was designed to
enlighten readers with respect to this plan. It was a lesson in scaling between
the world historical and the personal, juxtaposing the history of the Habsburg
Empire and the world at large with the stories of Vienna’s inhabitants, each
with its own particular joys and sorrows.23 In short, the essay modeled shifts
between different magnitudes of perception and different degrees of emotional
distance.
In this respect, Stifter’s contributions to Vienna and the Viennese demonstrated techniques of scaling appropriate to subjects of a supranational state.
Climatology was not incidental to this program. In “Viennese Weather,” Stifter
began by noting that every great city or small village has its own distinctive
weather. Although he denied that “the subject is ridiculous,” the essay veers
between science and satire. On the serious side, Stifter expressed concern
about smoke pollution and pointed out the atmospheric effect now known
as an urban heat island (a phenomenon that had been documented by Luke
Howard in London).24 On the other hand, he relentlessly mocked the scientific climatology of his day. In particular, he lampooned the pedantry of naturalists who distinguished ever-finer climatic regimes, identifying not only
Unterschiede (contrasts) but Unter-Unterschiede (subordinate contrasts), such
as “a peculiar suburb-weather or even authentic square- or alley-climates.” He
caricatured the weather “connoisseurs” or “collectors” who took a perverse

152

Chapter Six

pleasure in meteorological events that sent their neighbors running for cover.
Stifter poked fun at their precious measuring instruments and at a fictive institute for “urban meteorology,” with departments such as the “humidity committee,” “the bureau of rainbows,” and “the eclipse senate.” In this spirit, he
played contrasts of scale for comic effect. Thus he claimed that a city as large
as the Sahara would be as dry as that desert. And he proposed that Vienna was
a climatic microcosm of the Monarchy as a whole: “Everyone knows that the
Alps have a rawer climate to their northern slopes, towards Switzerland, than
in their southern ones, towards Italy— and are whole rows of houses not Alps
of this sort? Which of us doesn’t know that the south face of the Archduke
Karl’s palace has a mild Italian climate?”25 Here is an image of Vienna as a
replica of the Monarchy in miniature, a scale model of its natural and human
diversity. Yet this is scaling in the mode of farce.
“Viennese Weather” was thus Stifter’s revenge against professional science,
following the rejection of his applications for academic posts. The satirical
tone also reflected his discomfort with urban environments. Cities, he wrote,
“spoil” man’s “only form of nourishment that he can get for free, unadulterated, and in unlimited quantities”— that is, air. Modern man was trapped
between leaving the city to breathe fresh air and remaining in it in order to
earn enough to afford all his other “forms of nourishment.” And yet Stifter
equivocated, refusing to take seriously the hypothesis of anthropogenic climate
change as it stood at the time. The essay worked too hard at humor to convey
genuine concern about the environmental impact of urbanization.
In these ways, “Viennese Weather” forms a striking contrast with one of
Stifter’s better-known journalistic pieces from the same period, an account
of the solar eclipse visible from Vienna on 8 July 1842. There Stifter’s theme
was the contrast between abstract knowledge and lived experience. Being
able to calculate the trajectories of heavenly bodies was no preparation for
the moment when broad daylight morphed into night. As in “The View from
St. Stephen’s” and “Viennese Weather,” “The Solar Eclipse” sought to relate
an experience shared simultaneously by all residents of the imperial capital.
“From the attic windows of the houses all around heads were peering, from
roof ridges figures stood and stared, all towards the same place in the sky . . .
and how many thousands of eyes in the surrounding mountains might be looking towards the sun at this moment.” The eclipse evokes at once the human
place in the cosmos and the place of Vienna in the empire. Here too Stifter
compares the narrow scope of daily urban life with the vast dimensions of
the empire; from where he stands, he can see all the way to Hungary. Here,
however, the emphasis falls on the cosmic scale, and the aesthetic is that of the

The Invention of Climatography 153

sublime. Like “Viennese Weather,” the essay emphasizes the limits of modern
science. “In mathematics,” he complains, “this space [the heavens] is nothing
more than large.” He tells us that God cares nothing for calculations. In this
way, Stifter underlines the arbitrariness of human systems of measurement,
which he contrasts with a God-given sense of “true measure” and with the
“language of nature.”26 Even so, the structure of Stifter’s essay suggests the
power of astronomy to prepare humanity for such a revelatory experience of
the cosmos’s true scale, precisely by means of its observing instruments and
its calculations. In the end, “The Solar Eclipse” suggests that the science of astronomy, widely disseminated and coupled to firsthand experience, may have
the capacity to right man’s sense of proportion.
Stifter had effectively thrown down a gauntlet to naturalists. As the satire of “Viennese Weather” suggested, the climatology of the 1840s was still
mere place description. It was unable to convey the significance of the local
in relation to the imperial, let alone the cosmic. In retrospect, it is not hard
to identify what was missing. Without attention to the relationship between
the particular and the general, between local winds and the planetary circulation, climatic description produced little more than a jumbled heap of “local contrasts.” This was the literary challenge to which dynamic climatology
would rise.

A n I n t e l l e c t ua l M i c ro s c o p e
It was once remarked against me that I only represent the little things, and that my
people are always ordinary people. . . . The flow of the air, the rippling of the water, the
growth of the grain, the waves of the sea, the greening of the earth, the gleaming of the
sky, the twinkling of the stars I consider great. . . . If a man were to observe the needle of
a compass, whose tip always points north, every day at the same time for many years, and
to record its variations in a book, an ignorant person would surely dismiss this first step
as insignificant and as a waste of time; but how awe-inspiring would this insignificant
thing become and how fascinating this waste of time, once we discover, that these observations have been made across the whole surface of the earth, and that, from the tables
thus produced, many small variations of the magnetic needle often occur simultaneously
and in the same degree at all points on the earth; thus that a magnetic storm passes
across the whole earth, that the whole earth simultaneously feels a magnetic shiver.
Adalbert Stifter, 185327

In 1849, the playwright Friedrich Hebbel poked fun at writers who made much
of “beetles” and “buttercups.” Such details could only interest a writer who
had no insight into his characters’ inner lives. Stifter retaliated four years later

154

Chapter Six

in the preface to his story collection Many-Colored Stones. His response is
often quoted by literary historians as a paradigmatic statement of realism, but
it deserves equal attention from historians of science. Stifter, after all, had set
out to become a physicist before launching his career as a novelist. Had he not
been turned down for teaching posts in Prague, Linz, and Vienna, he might
never have written his beloved stories of rural communities and the natural
world.28 Stifter justified his attention to “little things” by analogy to geophysics. In nature, as in human life, Stifter argued, often the little things are most
significant, once they are recognized as instances of a more general pattern,
perceptible to observers everywhere. He offered the example of the study of
magnetic variations across the earth’s surface: small effects that, when taken
together, reveal a higher law.
It was in these same years that Karl Kreil spearheaded the project of measuring magnetic and meteorological variations across the surface of the Habsburg
lands. Kreil and Stifter can be said to have been pursuing different answers to
the same question: the search for a less arbitrary scale of significance than narrow personal interest. In 1838 Kreil had moved to the observatory in Prague,
where he began to collect the data that would form the basis for his Climatology of Bohemia. This was to be the first volume of a climatology of the entirety
of the Austrian lands. According to his biographer, it became “the major work
of his life,” and he labored on it until his death. He saw it as a departure from
his earlier publications on astronomy and geomagnetism, which were “strictly
scientific, abstract works.” Instead, the Climatology would draw on Kreil’s own
observations and would aim to be of practical use, particularly in agricultural
communities like that of his childhood in Upper Austria. The challenge would
be to give it “vitality and freshness.” Indeed, Johann Franz Encke, head of the
Berlin observatory, wrote Kreil to say that he hoped the book would be more
than a “mere sea of numbers,” that it would work through its data and arrive
at some attractive results.29 This was precisely Kreil’s intention. Like Stifter,
he was trying to perfect a new mode of writing that would represent the true
significance of the small scale in relation to the large.
In the version published posthumously in 1865, Kreil initially defined the
goals of climatology (as opposed to meteorology) as follows:
Climatology represents the facts that have been uncovered by the observer as
clearly and convincingly as the observations and the means of obtaining them
allow; it writes the history or natural history of the atmosphere in the script
of numbers, in order to identify therein the influence [of the atmosphere]
on the earth and its form, and vice versa. For the eye practiced in this script,

The Invention of Climatography 155

its tables are the true image of phenomena in the atmosphere. . . . By juxtaposing these tables and translating the numbers into spoken language, often
into graphic representations as well, its task is completed, and it can leave it
to the meteorologist, to the zoologist and the geologist, the botanist and the
physician, the architect and the farmer, to draw from it what they need for
their ends.30

According to Kreil, climatology offered description, while meteorology provided explanation, but this was not a strict division. Just as a historian sometimes ventured to speculate on the cause of human actions, so might the climatologist draw on meteorology to suggest how climatic conditions could
be explained. Kreil used “climatology” to refer both to the discipline and the
genre, much as “cosmography” had been used in both senses in the Renaissance. He did not employ the term “climatography,” but his definition of climatology as a mode of representation squares with subsequent definitions of
“climatography”: it was concerned with the human meaning of meteorological
measurements.
Climatography was invented to mediate between mathematical measurements of climatic factors and the subjective human experiences with which
they might be associated, such as fluctuations in health, hunger, and prosperity. As Kreil explained, the physician wanted to know the distribution and
variability of temperature, the quantity and distribution of rain, and the direction and strength of wind; the engineer and architect wanted to know the
height of floodwaters, the strength of storms and the direction from which
they came; the farmer asked after the extremes of temperature and the length
of the seasons, the quantity of rain, and the frequency of hail.31 As Wladimir
Köppen wrote in his Klimakunde (1906), climate science “offers the farmer,
the industrialist, the physician, the basis on which to judge the influence of
the usual course of these phenomena at a given place on the growth of plants,
on industrial processes, on diseases, etc.”32 Indeed, one finds references to
climatographies in handbooks for travelers, in works on scientific agriculture,
in medical guides, in advertisements for spas, even in military strategy. In this
sense, climatography was defined by its uses. It was explicitly addressed to a
wide variety of ordinary people who needed knowledge of natural conditions
in relation to human welfare: the length of seasons, the likelihood of frost, the
freezing of waterways. Among the intended users of a climatography were
the many people “on the move” in nineteenth-century empires: farmers and
colonists, merchants and shippers, medical doctors and patients, military captains, tourists and explorers. As H. F. Blanford explained in his 1889 Practical

156

Chapter Six

Guide to the Climates and Weather of India, he was writing not primarily for
“meteorologists and physicists,” but for members of “the general public to
whom the weather and the climates of India and of its seas are practical and
not scientific objects of interest.” He therefore aimed for “clear and concise
language,” free of “all technical forms of expression.”33 In other words, the
implied users of a climatography were those imperial subjects who had the
freedom and mobility to be able to put environmental information to use. In
the Habsburg lands— where passports were not required for domestic migration after 1857, and where the Constitution of 1867 officially granted freedom of movement— this was a wide public indeed.34 This is the most decisive
difference between the early modern genre of cosmography, which remained
a state secret, and the modern genre of climatography. That is to say, the historical relationship between these two genres tracks in part the emergence of
an audience for whom environmental measurements could acquire meaning.
Thus it fell to the author of a climatography to model the interpretation of
measurements. In doing so, Kreil’s Climatology used the very same language
that Stifter had used against Hebbel. “Everywhere there is a macrocosm and
a microcosm,” he insisted, “a world on the large scale and on the small— the
latter just as important, often more important than the former.”35 Both authors
were instructing their readers in the interpretation of nature on the small scale.
And both were defending themselves against those like Hebbel or Encke who
might accuse them of attending too closely to meaningless particulars.
In this vein, Kreil noted that naturalists were often too quick to posit largescale natural laws, taking “pleasure in a lovely discovery, before the smallscale phenomena, the quotidian processes, have been properly appreciated.”
Echoing Stifter, he continued, “Thus there can and should be much included
in climatology that would seem insignificant from the present perspective of
the practical fields that it bears on, for instance the state and variations of air
pressure, which is of no direct significance to any of these fields, but which
in the mechanics of the atmosphere must be seen as one of the most powerful controls.” Like Stifter, Kreil drew analogies to other domains of nature.
In the animal kingdom, for instance, the “great monsters of prehistory” had
vanished, while “the smallest animals continue to live and work spryly. For
thousands of years they were neglected, and only now have we recognized
their importance. The same is true in the physical realm.” Despite the rise
of uniformitarian geology, Kreil noted, naturalists were still drawn first to
“phenomena on a grand scale.” Likewise, in atmospheric physics, scientists
had rushed to draw conclusions about the laws governing weather on the
largest scale, before attending to the many small influences to which their

The Invention of Climatography 157

measuring instruments were sensitive. (Kreil may have been referring here
to studies by Bohemian plant scientists demonstrating the variability of temperature near the ground— see chapter 9. His standpoint also prefigures the
subfield of “fluctuation phenomena,” pioneered by Austrian physicists in
subsequent decades.36) Although Kreil had been drawn into geophysics by
Humboldt’s example, he was resisting Humboldt’s haste to synthesize. He
insisted that one must “observe the quotidian processes with an intellectual
microscope and disregard nothing that does not fit into the regular course.
The smallest deviation, that has intervened perhaps a thousand times already,
only to be passed over as observational error or so-called random variability,
can, if properly confirmed, become a lamp that illuminates a formerly obscure
chamber of science.”37 Playing with the inversion of scale, Kreil likened the
narrow view through a microscope to the wider field of a beam of light. This
was, in part, an attempt to forestall criticism of his Climatology for its limited
geographic scale. “Many will believe that it would have been more advantageous to have immediately extended climatological consideration to the entire
territory of the Austrian Monarchy, instead of dividing it into different parts.”
However, he insisted that “our Monarchy” was built up of such radically different physical parts that it was most efficient to treat it province by province.
Bohemia, having the longest continuous period of observation, plus a natural
orographic border, was a logical starting point for this project. What Kreil left
unsaid was that, in the early 1860s, the Monarchy’s physical diversity was still
a rhetorical trope awaiting empirical demonstration. This would require new
literary techniques alongside the visual tools of cartography and landscape
painting.
Kreil’s Climatology of Bohemia represents the fusion of two traditions of
climatological study: the physico-theology of Kremsmunster, where he had
been a gymnasium student, and the vlastiveda or patriotic science of Bohemia, where he had become a scientific leader in the provincial capital. From
physico-theology, Kreil drew a religiously inspired appreciation of the role of
small-scale nature in a divine cosmic plan. From patriotic Bohemian science,
he took the conviction that the detailed work of local nature study would bring
practical economic benefits. Out of these two unique cultural traditions, Kreil
was weaving a new approach to planetary science.
And yet, despite Kreil’s commitment to producing something more than
a “sea of numbers,” readers of the incomplete book that he left behind upon
his death in 1862 were indeed at risk of drowning in measurements. The text
functioned mainly to guide the reader’s eyes through the numerical tables.
Climatography as a literary genre had yet to be invented.

158

Chapter Six

Realism and the Rhetoric of Scaling
While Kreil was trying to build a language for climatology, Stifter was honing a
literary language that shared many of the same aims. Even at the time, readers
recognized how closely Stifter’s style of observation mimicked natural history.
Friedrich Simony, for instance, attributed to Stifter the capacity to observe
both as a painter and a naturalist.38 More importantly, the relativity of scale
functioned as an aesthetic principle in Stifter’s fiction, much as it functioned
as a methodological principle in the geoscientific research that radiated out of
Kremsmunster.
In a pivotal early scene of Der Nachsommer, for instance, Risach, the wise
naturalist, predicts that the afternoon’s threatening clouds wil not bring rain,
even though his measuring instruments suggest otherwise: the barometer is
falling, and the hygrometer indicates maximal humidity. Here Risach insists
on a first shift in scale; these indicators refer only to “the small space in which
one happens to find oneself; one must also consider a larger one.”39 Thus
Risach draws the narrator’s attention to the sky and to the folk knowledge necessary to interpret its signs, like the shapes and movements of clouds. “Quite
rightly,” he remarks, “science often relies on knowledge gained from long experience.” Then Risach proposes a second shift in scale, observing that “all the
signs that we have spoken of so far are quite coarse . . . and are usually only recognized by us by means of spatial variations— which cannot even be observed
by us if they do not attain a certain magnitude.” Scientific instruments translate
signs that are too large for our senses, such as the motions of the atmosphere,
into ones we can read. But such instruments pale in comparison to the “finer
contrivances” whose workings remain a mystery to us. These contrivances
are nerves: not human nerves, which tend to be overtaxed, but the nerves of
animals, especially the insects and spiders. With patient, regular observation
of these little creatures’ habits and “domestic arrangements,” one can learn to
use them as reliable weather indicators. All this would be patent, Risach concludes, if only people could adjust their sense of proportion: “Many men who
are accustomed to view themselves and their pursuits as the center of the world
consider these things to be small. But it is otherwise for God. Something is
not large just because we can lie our ruler along it many times, and something
is not small because we have no ruler to measure it.” By the novel’s end, the
narrator has fully assimilated this lesson.
Stifter enacted such reversals and inversions of scale in many of his stories. Amitav Ghosh has argued that a defining feature of modern fiction is
the constancy and passivity of the nonhuman world.40 Stifter’s fiction is ex-

The Invention of Climatography 159

ceptional in this respect, persistently redirecting attention from the human
characters to the nonhuman backdrop. The narrator of “The Bachelors”
(“Der Hagestolz”), for instance, interrupts the characters’ conversation to
spotlight the world around them: “While they spoke of what they believed to
be great, around them transpires only what they likewise believed to be small:
the bushes continue to grow, the fertile earth continues to sprout and begins
to play with spring’s first little creatures as if with jewels.”41 This passage even
suggests that nature has its own scale of values, independent of human norms,
and thus its own definition of jewels. Indeed, one might say that all of Stifter’s
fiction questions the priority usually given to plot over description. In a similar ploy, the narrator of “Two Sisters” challenges the reader to juxtapose the
temporality of human life with that of nonhuman nature: “If, with your feelings
and thoughts, you remain outside of the present moment, and are not dragged
along by it, then everything restless, covetous, passionate hastens past. . . .
If you observe nature then . . . what hustle and bustle here, what persistence
there!”42
Elsewhere Stifter presented the reader with a new lens through which to
view the world: a telescope. Halfway through “The View from St. Stephen’s,”
for instance, the narrator instructs the reader to “take the telescope,” and
asks, “What do you see?” Here, as in “The Solar Eclipse,” and the opening
of “The High Forest” (“Der Hochwald”), Stifter leads the reader on a tour of
a landscape, shifting between a synoptic gaze and the spyglass’s wandering,
magnified view. In other stories, the characters use a telescope to collapse
distances on earth (as in “The High Forest”) or between earth and sky (“The
Condor”).43 In yet other instances, Stifter’s exercises in scaling entail imagining the world through nonhuman eyes. In “The High Forest,” the figure of
the lake as eye— a “Naturauge”— helps to place the human scale of the story
into a much longer temporal frame. Viewed through this more-than-human
lens, the human tragedy symbolized by architectural ruins is dwarfed by the
ecological tragedy of the destruction of the forest. In other cases, the human
eye is trained to see anew. In “The Kiss of Sentze,” instruction in scaling is
provided by “small things” themselves. Mosses, in particular, teach people to
appreciate nature’s wondrousness (Verwunderlichkeit). The narrator learns to
see a whole world of variation in a sample of moss: “I saw in the collection a
greater number of mosses than I would have thought possible. I saw affinities,
connections, and transitions. In the pressed leaves I saw the bounty of forms
and was astounded by their delicacy and distinctiveness.” As one of the most
ancient phyla of plants, and one known for its slow growth, mosses evoke not
only a contraction of the spatial scale of observation but also an expansion

160

Chapter Six

of the temporal. Against the backdrop of the failures of 1848, these smallest
living things teach the lesson that “only things in nature are entirely true [nur
die Naturdinge sind ganz wahr].”44 Here Stifter’s inversion of plot and description turns the historical drama into mere background. But it is a telling
background, in that the political turmoil is the incentive to learn to see in this
new way. Like Kreil’s scientific methods, Stifter’s literary techniques of scaling
were a response to the emerging ideal of supranationalism.
To Rainer Maria Rilke, the Prague-born poet of the fin de siècle, such
shifts in scale seemed to be the driving force behind Stifter’s entire oeuvre.
It seemed possible that Stifter’s “inner calling became inevitable the moment
that he, one unforgettable day, first attempted to draw an exceedingly remote
point in the landscape into view through a telescope and then, with vision
utterly staggered, experienced a flight from rooms, from clouds, from objects,
an amazement of such abundance that, in these seconds, his open, astonished
mind grasped world.”45 Rilke took from Stifter both the language of scaling
and the motivation to make a reader see the world according to a scale other
than that of human desires. As he described this insight in a letter to a painter
friend,
most people hold things in their hands to do something stupid with them (as,
for example, tickling each other with peacock feathers), instead of looking
carefully at each thing and asking each about the beauty it possesses. So it
comes to pass that most people don’t know at all how beautiful the world is and
how much splendor is revealed in the smallest things, in some flower, a stone,
the bark of a tree, or a birch leaf. . . . The small is as little small as the big is big.
There is a great and eternal beauty throughout the world, and it is scattered
justly over the small things and the big; for in the important and essential there
is no injustice on the whole earth.46

The lesson, as Rilke put it elsewhere, was to “learn from the things” and “surrender to earth’s intelligence.”47

T h e D y na m i c E l e m e n t i n C l i m ato g r a p h y
The literary strategies of climatography deserve to be considered alongside
Stifter’s techniques of scaling. Hann’s 1904 Climatography of Lower Austria
was intended as the template for all subsequent publications in this series and
was hailed as a “model” for “monographs on the climate of other countries.”48
In the introduction, Hann expressed his literary aims thus:

The Invention of Climatography 161

My work can and will not aspire to anything more than to furnish the necessary, appropriately constructed numerical framework [Zahlenskelett] for such
a true climate description as I envision as an ideal, but which cannot even be
attempted here. A true climate description would need to exhibit a piece of
living nature, the total effect of all interacting meteorological elements, which
is literally what we mean by climate, pointing to the connections to the local
factors that determine the natural surface vegetation, as well as, especially, to
the agricultural and industrial circumstances of the region, to the location of
human settlements and their way of life, in so far as these depend on the average conditions of the atmosphere and their variation, as they influence man in
his sites of residence.49

Even by the standards of German prose, this last sentence is striking for its
length and convolutedness. By drawing it out and inserting so many active
subjects, Hann underlined his definition of climate as a dynamic, evolving
system with many moving parts. He strove to make climatography more than
a “numerical framework,” more than a “sea of numbers.”
The Climatography of Lower Austria is a text shot through with movement.
It follows the winds as they blow across the surface of the earth, transformed
by the mountains and valleys they encounter. It shows how the winds— some
of local provenance, some sweeping in from afar— are, in turn, the bearers of
weather. It surveys climatic regions that are only more or less enclosed, each
standing in communication with other regions— thanks, once again, to the
persistent work of the winds. This dynamism is the key to climatography’s
effect of scaling.
That is, climatography conveys the significance of the local and particular
by revealing each part as a component of a dynamic whole. Each volume of the
series interprets the peculiarities of a region in relation to their participation
in larger-scale patterns, whether in real time or as monthly or annual averages.
Each distinguishes between strictly local winds, like those arising in enclosed
valleys, which are “of minimal climatological interest,” and air currents that
traverse larger distances. These larger-scale trajectories are often described in
relation to itineraries a human traveler might follow. Thus, for instance, the average annual temperature in Tyrol can be seen to fall as one follows the river Inn
downstream. Similarly, several of the texts employ phenological data to track
the arrival of spring across a region. Some imagine following the blooming of
a particular flower or the ripening of a given fruit. More anthropomorphically,
winds are said to follow “roads” (Straßen) through the mountains. Climate
is described not only in relation to the flow of air, but also with regard to the

162

Chapter Six

circulation of people. A region’s status as a Sommerfrische (summer resort), a
Wintersportplatz (winter recreation area), or a klimatische Kurort (climate therapy resort) is taken as initial evidence of its climatic qualities. Reference is made
to the cooler summer temperatures that draw visitors to a Sommerfrische, to
the plentiful snow and mild winters of a Wintersportplatz, and to the abundant
sunshine of a klimatische Kurort. Notably, when the circulation of people does
not follow the circulation of air, this discrepancy earns mention. This was the
case for the western Alpine towns of Langen and Sankt Anton, which displayed
a difference of monthly average temperature of up to one degree Celsius. These
are “two locations, separated only by the Arlberg, which are connected to each
other— yet sure enough, not climatically— by the 10-km long Arlbergtunnel.”50
Climatography is surprising in this respect. We would expect it to be a
genre of place, like Humboldtian cosmography. We might expect it to resemble
much of what is classified as “nature writing” in the United States, with its
privileging of the local and its almost Heideggerian fascination with “rootedness.”51 As an imperial genre, however, climatography— like early modern
cosmography— was not about place in this sense at all. It was instead about
circulation: about the actual and potential mobility of air, goods, and people
through an empire. The science with which it was in dialogue was not a physics of static forces and stable equilibrium; it was, rather, the emerging science
of dynamic climatology, focused on the motion of air masses and their modification by the earth’s surface.
Stifter too was fascinated by the challenge of representing motion, both in
literature and the visual arts. Indeed, he believed that the aesthetic effect of
art turned on the reader’s or viewer’s experience of movement, whether this
derived from the artist’s evocation of motion or the motion of the viewer’s own
gaze. As Risach reflects in Der Nachsommer, “Movement stimulates, stillness
satisfies, and thus arises the spiritual closure that we call beauty.”52 Consider,
in this light, Stifter’s series of paintings and sketches entitled “Movement,”
which occupied him for several years in the late 1850s and early 1860s. They
sought to capture the sheer essence of motion, as made visible, for instance,
in the forms of clouds or falling water. One such study (see figure 21) centers,
paradoxically, on a large stone, immobile in a shallow creek. Motion exists in
the painting only in the subtle pattern of the flow of water around the rock. It
is the viewer who transforms this into an image of motion, as the composition
leads the gaze from foreground to background and back again in a counterclockwise circulation.
Climatography adopted a related technique. It acquired its dynamism only
in part from the depiction of movement in nature. Equally important was the

The Invention of Climatography 163

F i g u r e 2 1 . Die Bewegung I, by Adalbert Stifter, ca. 1858– 62.

implied movement of the observer. In this sense, climatography’s dynamic
rhetoric was performative. As we will see, it not only described but promoted
the mobility of imperial subjects.

Wanderlust
Climatography produced an effect of “lifelike” description not simply by virtue of its textual qualities, but by serving as a model for relating measurements
to experience. Indeed, the genre depends on an implicit narrative: that of the
imperial naturalist, learning to situate his own local knowledge within the continental framework of the empire he serves.
In 1887 Crown Prince Rudolf introduced the “overview” volume of AustriaHungary in Word and Picture with an invitation to the reader “to a tour
through wide, wide open spaces, through multilingual nations, in the midst
of constantly changing images.” When Julius Hann took up the challenge of
writing a “climatic overview” of the empire for this volume, he likewise framed
it as a journey. He imagined a traveler making the mere half day’s journey from
a wintry Vienna, “with its monotonous snow cover, the dusky cloud-covered
sky and uncomfortably frosty temperatures,” to Fiume and its “mild air full

164

Chapter Six

of sunshine and painterly light.” From Fiume, one could— if only the tracks
existed— continue down the Dalmatian coast and into the full bloom of spring,
or, moving a short distance west to Ljubljana and into Carinthia, one could
rejoin winter in the “Austrian Siberia.” This was a new spin on an old trope,
for Hann introduced into this picture of endless variety a human factor: a traveler conscientiously exposing himself to the “climatic contrasts” and letting
them “operate on him directly.”53 He didn’t fail to refer to the empire’s famed
Kurorte, such as Arco and Riva, or to point out that there were locations in the
Austrian Alps that could rival Davos for cold-weather treatments. In this essay,
however, it was not the destination but the journey that mattered. Rail travel
set the proper pace for assimilating the empire’s variety. It is a conceit that puts
one in mind of the travels of Count Morstin in Joseph Roth’s “The Bust of the
Emperor”: “As he traveled around the center of his multitudinous fatherland,
what he responded to most were certain specific and unmistakable manifestations that recurred, in their unvarying and still colorful fashion, at every railway
station.”54 Nineteenth-century rail travel, the agent of the standardization of
time, suggested that diversity could be digested deliberately and methodically.
While Roth’s Count Morstin tracked the recurring motifs of imperial insignias and coffeehouses, Hann’s traveler followed the buds and blossoms
of spring. As Hann explained, tracing the appearance of seasonal vegetation
from one location to another gave a more vivid (anschaulich) idea of climatic
contrasts than did the readings of a thermometer. The journey metaphor thus
became an exercise in phenology, the study of seasonal natural phenomena
and their geographic distribution. To follow spring on its course through the
empire was to search for regularity in the midst of change— in Roth’s words,
“the familiar in the variable”— a quest that found visual expression in two engravings of spring vegetation. The first (figure 22), in Silesia, showed a peasant
hut with animals and a mother and child against a vast, flat, and still barren
expanse. The second (figure 23), on the island Lacroma near Ragusa, appears
to be the ruins of a palace, overgrown with ferns and dappled with tulips. In
the context of Hann’s chapter, these images are a variation on the theme of the
coexistence of primitive and decadent, depicting not the Gleichzeitigkeit des
Ungleichzeitigens but near simultaneity: the two-month delay between spring’s
arrival in the Mediterranean and in Silesia. Following spring’s course through
the empire from the southern coastline to the low-lying western lands, up the
mountains, and into the east took two and a half months in all. The metaphor Hann repeatedly fell back on to describe the progress of spring was not
an awakening (perhaps too redolent of nationalism) but a “conquest.” One
after another, spring brought the crown lands “under its rule [Herrschaft]”—

The Invention of Climatography 165

F i g u r e 2 2 . Spring on the March: Silesia.

except, that is, on the tallest peaks, where “winter has made its permanent
home.” The imperial metaphor persisted into Hann’s account of the empire’s
characteristic air currents: “By far the largest part of Austria stands throughout the whole year under the sway [Herrschaft] of the Atlantic air currents.”
Galicia and Bukovina, however, “stand wholly open to the cold-invasions out
of Russia from north-east and east, while the other crown lands (except Silesia) are more withdrawn from these in part due to the mountains, in part due
to their western position.”55 In Hann’s account, wind, weather, and seasons
swept triumphantly through the empire— not unlike the crown prince in his
aerial geography of his father’s lands.
This image vividly illustrated one of the central theses of the Climatography of Austria: the empire was as much a climatic as a geopolitical transition
zone (ubergangsgebiet) between the temperate, maritime west and the severe,
continental east. As such, its climatic contrasts could be understood as continuous transitions. The language of continuity was essential to the Climatography. In Styria, for instance, the climate revealed “an uninterrupted series of
transitions. The central European intensifies into the eastern European on
one side and is tempered on the other side into the coastal climate. But one
searches in vain for an abrupt change; it does not take place in bounds, nowhere does one find the one or the other type sharply pronounced, because
everywhere the influence of the mountains resonates like a soft, mellow over-

166

Chapter Six

F i g u r e 2 3 . Spring on the March: Lacroma.

tone.”56 Here the implicit imagery of atmospheric waves lent itself to a more
typical Habsburg metaphor: unity as musical harmony.
This imagery recurred elsewhere in the travel literature of the late Habsburg
Monarchy, for instance, in Friedrich Umlauft’s Tours of the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy (1879, second edition 1883). This was a lavishly illustrated volume
commissioned by the education ministry in Vienna, meant as leisure reading for a popular audience and to serve the needs of instructors. The preface
announced the goal of “stimulating interest in the less familiar regions” of
the Monarchy and “awakening the Wanderlust of a wide circle [of readers].”
Umlauft set out to integrate cultural and environmental description, such that
“first folk culture, then climatic or geognostic circumstances receive more detailed consideration.” Like Hann, he emphasized “the contrasts of landscape”
and “climatic contrasts” that a tourist of Austria-Hungary encountered. In the

The Invention of Climatography 167

Alps, it was “as if you had covered hundreds of miles in the course of one day.
It is no wonder that just these phenomena alone can call forth a full range of
spiritual arousals and sensations.”57 Circulation, continuity, and the embodied
experience of difference were the motifs that climatology contributed to the
literary representation of Austria-Hungary.

The Discovery of Diversity
To compose a climatography was to reveal borders. It fell to the author to identify, on the basis of qualitative and quantitative evidence, the “natural borders”
of the region under study, as well as the internal borders between one “climatic
zone” and another. In some cases, the transition from one zone to another was
gradual; in other cases, sharp. A historian considering this process might well
wonder: did climatography discover divisions that existed in nature, or did it
construct new categories of difference? It is a defining feature of climatography
that it made this epistemological concern explicit.
Tasked with composing the climatography of Tyrol, Heinrich von Ficker
faced a dual challenge: the absence of even a single mountain observatory to
supply data on higher altitudes, combined with the presence of what he saw
as the two “completely separate climatic regions” of North and South Tyrol.
North Tyrol was an example of a “central European” climate region, modified
by a mountain range that lent it relatively warm temperatures, ample sunshine,
and the notorious foehn winds. South Tyrol, however, was an “Alpine variant”
on a Mediterranean climate. For practical purposes, Ficker acknowledged the
necessity of providing an overview of the province as a whole— it was, after
all, a “political unit.” But how to compare such different regions, especially
given the holes in the data? On one hand, Ficker called on a colleague in
zoology to provide information on the climatic dependence of Tyrol’s flora
and fauna, since these allowed “the climatic borders to be far more sharply
defined than with purely meteorological data.” Indeed, the zoologist noted the
presence of many “Mediterranean” species in South Tyrol. Yet he contributed
little more than a laundry list of species, nothing approaching a systematic
“overview.” By contrast, Ficker himself achieved his most striking overview by
calculating— separately for North and South Tyrol— the average temperature
at the region’s average height. This revealed a north-south temperature gradient three times greater than the global standard. Here was a striking illustration
of Ficker’s thesis that North and South Tyrol were split by a climatic divide.
Yet Ficker was able to restore continuity to his picture of Tyrol by identifying
“a transitional region” in the Eisack Valley, near the famous Brenner Pass, with

168

Chapter Six

moderately cooler summer temperatures and moderately greater temperature
variability than farther south. He concluded by paying homage to the empire’s
diversity:
For the climatographer Tyrol is one of the most interesting regions of the
monarchy. The climatic contrasts are stark and yet in their distinctive features
mostly a blessing for the province. To assess these differences, to represent
them in numbers, is an attractive task for the climatologist. Yet the contrast
imprints itself in memory far more strongly when a spring journey of a few
hours across the Brenner reveals to the senses the image of an abrupt change
of climate like no other. The climatologist’s burden is lightened in this way,
since his numbers mingle effortlessly [knupfen ungezwungen] with the common ideas that every educated person almost intuitively associates with the
concepts “North Tyrol” and “South Tyrol.” Stark contrasts make the climatologist’s work easier, particularly in regions that belong, thanks to their scenic
beauty, to the most famous of the continent.

The image of crossing the Brenner— the alpinist’s gaze— suggests continuity
rather than mere contrast. As Ficker explained, “The great contrasts between
north and south Tyrol are blurred from great heights.”58
Yet the question arises: was such a border real or perceived, an element
of the natural world or a statistical artifact? The Climatography provided no
conclusive answer to this question. Its authors often paused to discuss the
choice between one statistical method and another. In the analogy proposed
by the Climatography of Styria, the choice of a statistical measure was like the
choice of a height from which to view a landscape. With the adoption of new
methods, “insignificant differences swell into round numbers; and these, after
further partition, differentiate themselves again from each other. And in places
where he could find no contrast, he flips the averages around, divides them according to season, graphs the annual curve and finally finds to his satisfaction a
difference— there, where everything had earlier looked the same to him, where
before he had discovered only small deviations.”59 Far from attempting to elide
the ambiguous nature of “climatic borders,” the authors of the Climatography
of Austria made the rhetorical choice to accentuate their indeterminacy.

Conclusion
Unlike environmental genres such as the chronicle or parish register, climatography did not explicitly record change over time. It defined climate as a

The Invention of Climatography 169

statistical description of weather over a period of a few decades, and it treated
the resulting distillation as existing outside of historical time. It depended further on the possibility of defining transhistorical “natural” regions. It showed
no interest in the question of climate change. And yet the genre’s elaborate
discussions of the choice of a scale of analysis revealed the drawing of climatic
borders to be an open-ended process, subject to perpetual revision. In this
way, climatography created a space for perceiving climatic change not only
across space but also over time. As we will see in part 3, the experience of drawing the borders of climatic regions propelled several Habsburg researchers to
investigate evidence of climate change.
The fashion for writing climatographies had passed by the early twentieth century, and today the term, rarely encountered, has come to mean little
more than a data set.60 Yet the quest to communicate climatology “in word
and image” has recently been renewed. In 2012, the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) published its first report to incorporate social
science. It argued that the impacts of climate change “will inevitably need to
be understood and responded to principally at the scale of the individual, the
individual household, and the community.” To illustrate this point, the authors
offered a single “ethnographic vignette.” They introduced “Joseph,” an eightyyear-old Tanzanian, who, we are told, has “witnessed many changes.” “What
do ‘changes’ (mabadiliko) mean to someone whose father saw the Germans
and British fight during the First World War and whose grandfather defended
against Maasai cattle raids when Victoria was still Queen? . . . What is ‘climate
change’ (mabadiliko ya tabia nchi) to Joseph?” This passage highlights Joseph’s
experience of shifting borders, both political and ecological, and suggests that
he does not distinguish between natural and human drivers of change. In the
context of the IPCC report, it poses the problem of mediating between expert
and local knowledge.61 Although “climate change” can be translated into Joseph’s language, the concept carries no meaning for him.
It was also circa 2012 that writers in Europe and North America began to
express an urgent need for literary innovation in order to make climate change
meaningful to educated Western readers. Consider, for instance, the preface
to the 2010 multiauthored volume Climate Refugees: “Our job is to tell stories
we have heard and to bear witness to what we have seen. The science was
already there when we started in 2004, but we wanted to emphasize the human dimension, especially for those most vulnerable.” One review of Climate
Refugees referred rightly to “the uncertain genre of the book,” while a critic on
the Amazon website expressed confusion: “I was expecting facts and figures,
charts and graphs. In fact, I was a bit suspicious when I thumbed through

170

Chapter Six

this and saw all the gorgeous photos in this book: it seemed too luxurious for
such a serious subject.”62 Here is an example of a self-conscious experiment in
making human meaning out of scientific results, one that disrupted its readers’
expectations by bending the rules of existing scientific and literary genres.
As this example suggests, the challenge of meaning-making identified by
the IPCC is not simply a problem of translation. Nor is it new. The question
of how to connect global models to “local stories” needs to be recognized as
part of a long history of efforts to communicate discursively the human meaning of environmental information. This history includes some forms better
known to literary scholars, like lyric poetry, travel narratives, nature writing,
and futuristic fiction, and some more familiar to historians of science, such
as cosmography, chorography, geography, natural history, medical geography,
weather diaries, ship logs, and parish registers. Climatography is among the
most recent of these genres, and it merits attention as a solution to the representational challenge first articulated by Karl Kreil: that of depicting climate,
on the large scale and the small, maximally objectively and simultaneously
subjectively, in its human significance.

Chapter 7

The Power of Local Differences

In 1884, Alexander Supan, professor of geography at the University of Czernowitz/Chernivtsi/Cernăuți summed up a lesson of the new dynamic climatology in his textbook Principles of Physical Geography: “It is, therefore, no exaggeration to say that the wind is the effective bearer of climate, and thus— since
climatic conditions regulate organic life and with it human development— a
cultural force of the greatest importance.”1 This chapter explains how the
wind acquired this physical and cultural significance.
In designating the wind as the bearer of climate, Supan acknowledged and
yet broke with a tradition of natural-philosophical explanation that dates back
to ancient Greece. In the Aristotelian schema, climate is determined by the
angle of incidence of sunlight at different latitudes, klima being the Greek
word for slope or incline. Deviations from this “solar” climate were attributed
to the winds that visited the location in question, each originating in a different
location and carrying different qualities of air. Local winds and the variability
they occasioned figured as disturbances overlaid on the simple geometry of
climatic zones. Thus winds were incidental to klima, and yet they were significant within the ancient tradition of Hippocratic medicine. Knowledge of the
typical winds at any given location was essential to maintaining good health.
This tradition lived on in the nineteenth century. It was manifest, for instance,
in the construction of wind roses, which visually summarized local statistics
on the frequency of wind from each direction (figure 24).2
Supan alluded to the new significance that the nineteenth century had bestowed on winds. In the framework of dynamic climatology, winds were interpreted as products of encounters between contrasting air masses. Dynamic

172

Chapter Seven

F i g u r e 2 4 . Thermal wind rose for northwestern Germany, 1861.

climatology posed questions such as, given a dry atmosphere initially at rest,
what spatial contrasts of temperature and pressure would produce winds like
those observed in nature? Once set in motion, how would such air currents
be affected by the earth’s rotation? Down the road, the theorist might try to
incorporate the effects of moisture and friction into the explanatory framework. In this way, nineteenth-century dynamic climatology no longer treated
winds as displaced air from a foreign clime, as in an Aristotelian framework.
Nor did it approach winds in the manner of climate dynamics today. Indeed,
this nineteenth-century way of posing questions might strike some readers as
odd. Today, what seems to require explanation is not the onset of atmospheric
motion, but departures from geostrophic flow— that is, deviations from an
equilibrium state of motion in which the force arising from a pressure gradient is balanced against the Coriolis force of the earth’s rotation, such that air

The Power of Local Differences 173

flows along lines of equal pressure. This “quasi-geostrophic” way of thinking
about atmospheric motions was not developed until the 1930s. It was driven,
however, by questions that had been nagging nineteenth-century dynamicists
for some time. Namely, what maintains the contrasts of temperature and pressure that give rise to energetic atmospheric motions? How is it that the atmosphere can support unstable conditions long enough for them to sustain strong
winds? These were questions that Austrian researchers like Julius Hann and
Alexander Supan helped to place on an international research agenda.
By the 1870s, governments and learned societies across Europe and North
America had invested deeply in meteorological observations. In Britain, France,
the Netherlands, Scandinavia, and the United States, the aim was, above all, to
construct an advance-warning system for storms. These efforts, which rested
on the synchronization of measurements via telegraphy and on the production
of synoptic charts, resulted in a growing base of empirical knowledge about the
strength and direction of winds in relation to the distribution of surface air pressure. Empirical rules for storm forecasting began to accumulate. One held that
wind strength in a cyclone is proportional to the pressure gradient, or the difference between barometric readings at neighboring stations.3 Another described
the direction of winds in a cyclone, that is, a storm characterized by rotational
motion around a center of low pressure.4 For many naturalists at the time, these
were simply handy rules of thumb for predicting strong winds.5 For others, they
held clues to the basic physics of storms. Only a few saw another potential: to
apply this new empirical knowledge of pressure and winds to elucidate the global
geography of climate. Those who rose to this last challenge tended to be scientists
in the employ of Europe’s great land empires— above all, Wladimir Köppen and
Alexander Voeikov in Russia, and Julius Hann and Alexander Supan in Austria.
Hann developed his dynamical approach to climate as he painstakingly
worked his way through the data of the growing station network of the ZAMG,
which he joined as an assistant in 1867, becoming director from 1877 to 1897.
He insisted that a detailed map of atmospheric pressure was “one of the most
important foundations of the scientific understanding of the climatic conditions” of the region under study.6 Here was a physical-mathematical solution to
the Austrian Problem of precisely representing local variation while simultaneously revealing a higher unity. The form it took reflected the broader emphasis
on phenomena of mixing and exchange in post-1848 accounts of the historical
development of the Habsburg Monarchy and its economic and political future.
Thus the study of pressure gradients and the winds to which they gave
rise seemed to hold the key to understanding the distribution of the earth’s
climates. This chapter also takes up the second part of Supan’s claim: dynamic

174

Chapter Seven

climatology was linked to new ways of thinking about human health and cultural development. The newly dynamic science of climate quickly became a
topic of popular interest, in an age fascinated by stories of the progress of
modern science. By the 1880s, schoolchildren as well as readers of Germanlanguage popular science journals and even provincial newspapers had ample
opportunity to acquire a basic understanding of the new theories of atmospheric motion. Climatology provided tools of scaling with which people
throughout the Habsburg lands could envision their place within imperial
networks of circulation and exchange. Not until the turn of the century did
scientists begin to question the physics behind this popular view.

T h e W ay s o f t h e W i n d s
The Austrian research program in dynamic climatology can be said to have
been launched in 1866, when Julius Hann, then an assistant at the ZAMG, overturned the reigning theory of the warm, dry mountain wind known as foehn.
Hann had used thermodynamics, the new science of the relationship between
heat and motion, to explain what happens as air is forced upward along a
mountainside. As a parcel of air rises into regions of lower pressure on its way
up the mountain, it does work by expanding. This process lowers the parcel’s
temperature as well as its specific pressure, causing condensation— and often
precipitation. By the reverse process, as the air then makes its way down the
other side of the mountain, it contracts and its temperature and specific pressure rise. This temperature rise will be greater than the temperature decrease
on the upwind side, since the decrease was offset by the latent heat of condensation. This was a principle that was quickly understood to be applicable
most generally to rising motions in the atmosphere. Hann had demonstrated
the power of a new way of thinking about climatic phenomena, in terms of the
interconversion of heat and motive power.
It was Hann’s judgment that a global science of climate could only progress
on the basis of more precise and detailed regional studies of the distribution
of air pressure, a basic thermodynamic variable. The German-Russian climatologist Wladimir Köppen had made this point in 1874, when he pointed out
that the Aristotelian use of the wind rose was flawed. Knowing the direction
from which the wind blew was not enough to tell you the character of the
wind. One also needed to know the surrounding pressure distribution, as he
demonstrated with reference to data from Siberia.7
This was the motivation behind Hann’s painstaking analysis of the distribution of pressure in central and southeastern Europe, averaged over the

The Power of Local Differences 175

first thirty years of the operation of the ZAMG’s network (1851– 80). This
was a daunting undertaking. Obtaining precise, standardized measurements
of pressure over a wide region was not straightforward. Pressure differences
between neighboring locations at the same altitude are far smaller in magnitude than differences of temperature; in fact, they were on the order of the
systematic error of the barometric measurements of Hann’s day.8 Fortunately,
the Austrian network had established the necessary conditions to produce
suitable data. At each station the barometer was calibrated against a standard
instrument, thanks to the inspection tours carried out every six years. And
the elevation of each station was known with precision due to the geodetic
measurements of the Imperial-Royal Military-Geographic Institute. What
remained was the long and arduous task of averaging thirty years of data
by hand.
Hann admitted that he had often spent a week or more deciding whether
to adjust the average pressure at a single location by a tenth of a millimeter in
either direction. “Many may well wonder if it is even worthy of a serious man
to devote so much time and effort to such a minor result.” Certainly, he wrote,
there had been times when he doubted it was worth it. But anyone prone to
such doubts for long, he insisted, was simply not fit to be a natural scientist,
and he quoted Francis Bacon to that effect.9 Just as Bacon had dedicated his
empiricism to his queen, Hann’s work was dedicated to governing a kingdom.
In fact, Hann’s Distribution of Air Pressure (1887) responded to the same representational challenge as did his chapter for the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy
in Word and Image, which happens to have appeared that same year. In both
cases, the goal was to keep fine-grained deviations in focus while constructing
a total view of the empire. The isobaric maps and accompanying descriptions
explained local peculiarities in relation to regional trends. Thus, for instance,
the wintertime isobars showed an area of high pressure with its center on the
south side of the eastern Alps. This corresponded to a “cold island” in the
valleys, with a temperature increase or capping inversion above, which explained why warmer air from the south didn’t penetrate into central Europe.
The same phenomenon could be found in eastern Hungary and Transylvania. Meanwhile, the center of low pressure over the eastern Mediterranean
and the Adriatic set up a pressure gradient that explained the strength of the
downslope bora winds on the Dalmatian coast.10 Hann looked forward to the
day when the significance of such a map could be appreciated in relation to a
complete description of the climatic conditions of Austria-Hungary. Only then
would it be possible to use pressure differences “to explain the differences of
wind conditions and their consequences.”11

176

Chapter Seven

F i g u r e 2 5 . Postcard showing the weather house in the city park in Graz, 1898. Weather
houses like these cropped up in city parks and public squares in spa towns throughout central
Europe in the late nineteenth century.

D y na m i c C l i m ato l o gy f o r A l l
Even as it was being worked out, the new dynamic climatology began to circulate
to a broad audience. Under Hann’s directorship of the ZAMG (1877– 97), the
number of observing stations in the network rose from 238 to 444.12 Teachers,
physicians, innkeepers, and telegraph operators were well represented among
those who volunteered their time to take note of the state of the atmosphere at
prescribed hours daily. Even those without access to their own meteorological
instruments could participate in this ritual, thanks to the “weather houses”
installed in parks and town squares (see figure 25). All the major Austrian spa
and resort towns boasted such an edifice, “which tend to be of a very luxurious
and tasteful design and are extremely popular with locals and visitors.”13 These
volunteer observers and spa-goers were among the educated readers eager to
hear of the latest progress in the sciences of weather and climate.
Hann’s popular The Earth as a Whole (1872) introduced the basic principles of the application of thermodynamics to the atmosphere, explaining,
for instance, the physics of sea breezes and the origins of the trade winds.
A more application-oriented presentation could be found in the 1874 Textbook of Climatology, With Particular Attention to Agriculture and Forestry.
It included the first climatic map of Austria-Hungary, which displayed the
empire as a transition zone between “oceanic” and “Pontic” climates, between
the West and the Orient, in which abrupt contrasts would immediately be
smoothed into continuous transitions. On the large scale as on the small, the

The Power of Local Differences 177

book explained, circulation was driven by “oppositions between warmer and
colder neighbors”—a claim we will examine below.14 Josef Roman Lorenz had
almost completed the book when he was called to the agricultural ministry in
Vienna; the last touches were left to Carl Rothe, a high school instructor in
Vienna, who received the assistance of experts like Jelinek and Hann. Thus
while many of the book’s explanations incorporated the latest thermodynamics, other passages fell back on Dove’s older account of a “struggle” between
polar and tropical air, including his view of cyclones as Ausnahme (exceptions
or deviations) within the general circulation.15 In fact, the seventy-one-yearold Dove contributed the book’s preface. One reviewer, attesting to the book’s
accessibility, deemed it just as useful for physicians as for farmers.
The press also helped to keep the public up to date on progress toward a
dynamic understanding of climate. In 1880, for instance, a series of articles in
the Teplitz-Schönauer Anzeiger (northern Bohemia) announced that “knowledge of the factors that determine air currents and their trajectory and speed
has been quite a recent achievement. It was not long ago that we had no more
correct idea of these relations than the ancient Greeks, who simply assumed
that the allmighty Zeus had appointed one of his ancestors, the skilled sailor
Aeolus, to be the guardian of the winds. . . . Now we know that the wind system of the Earth is governed on the whole by two dominant currents, which
have their origin in the uneven heating of the earth’s surface by the sun.” From
there the article went on to sketch the Hadley model of the general circulation
(see chapter 8). Finally, the author explained that “the strength as well as the
direction of the winds appear to be dependent on differences of air pressure
and its distribution.” A subsequent article in this series worked through an
example, tracing the life cycle of a cyclone based on reports from the ZAMG.16
In the Wiener Landwirtschaftliche Zeitung (a popular, illustrated, agricultural
magazine), readers learned in 1885 how they could subscribe to the ZAMG’s
daily forecasting service. They also received a lesson in the “basic principles
of modern meteorology,” including the relationship between the distribution
of pressure and the direction of winds. As the author explained, this would
allow readers to decipher synoptic charts themselves, so that they “can form
a judgment for themselves of the influence of the general weather situation on
the local weather of their place of residence.”17
By the 1880s, dynamic climatology had already found its way into at least
one high school textbook. Students were taught to view their local weather
as a link in a planetary chain of events: “For the most part, our weather is not
determined by local conditions and circumstances, but rather by the course
of the air-pressure minima and air-pressure maxima. The air-pressure minima

178

Chapter Seven

originate in the Atlantic Ocean and mainly travel over Scotland and northern
Europe. If such a depression center approaches us in central Europe, then we
have south and southwesterly winds, and as these arise clouds cover the sky;
west and northwesterly winds follow, from which the moisture falls as rain.”18
This text also conveyed the difficulty of predicting the outcome of such a synoptic situation: if the pressure minimum continued on its path, central Europe
could experience a clear sky with winds from the northeast; but if a second
minimum separated off from the first, the result could be storms in southern
Europe, whether sirocco, foehn, or bora. By 1899, the subject of “isotherms,
isobars, winds” had been incorporated into the physics curriculum of Austrian
Realschulen, even if appropriate textbooks weren’t always available to teach
it.19 In short, in the course of the last decades of the nineteenth century, an educated German-speaking public was gaining access to elements of a dynamic
theory of climate.

Cold Spells, Frost Saints,
a n d N at i v e H u n ga r i a n s
Dynamic climatology was presented to students and newspaper readers not
only as a signature achievement of modern science, but also as a bridge between science and folk wisdom. As we have seen, folk knowledge was built
into the new atmospheric dynamics through scientists’ engagement with local
accounts of phenomena like foehn and mountain inversions. Presentations
of dynamic climatology for a general audience highlighted this convergence
between expert and lay perspectives.
For instance, one could expect to find climate-themed articles in local newspapers throughout much of central Europe during the second or third week in
May. After the first warm weeks of spring, it often happened that the weather
suddenly turned cold. This phenomenon was so familiar that an elaborate mythology had arisen around it. In popular speech, a temperature drop between
the twelfth and fourteenth days of May was known in German as the Eisheilige
(frost saints) or Eismänner (frost men), or the strenge Herren, the strict lords.
In Czech, it went by the name Pan Serboni (Mr. Serboni), formed from the
first syllables of the names of the saints associated with these dates: Pankrac,
Servac, Bonifac. Hence the saying, Pan Serboni pali stromy, Mr. Serboni
withers the trees. In Polish, the phrase was Pankracy, Serwacy, Bonifacy to źli
na ogrody chłopacy, suggesting that these saints were bad boys when it came
to gardens. These frost saints were a source of great fear in central Europe,
because they were capable of destroying entire crops at the very start of the

The Power of Local Differences 179

growing season. Weather lore like this, passed down from one generation to the
next, reminded farmers to take appropriate precautions. Many communities
had devised tactics to protect their crops when a freeze threatened, most often
by blanketing their fields in smoke.20
Whether or not this weather pattern occurs more frequently in mid-May
than at other times of year has never been clear.21 Already in the 1870s and
1880s, some scientists attributed the reports of a regular mid-May cold spell
to faulty statistics and stubborn superstition.22 As an 1887 article in the Innsbrucker Nachrichten put it, “Cases in which the effect is absent are forgotten,
since, as Kepler already knew, one retains the occurrence, forgets the absence,
since it’s nothing special after all.”23 Nonetheless, much of the population of
central Europe at the time was united in expecting a cold snap in mid-May,
and newspaper editors aimed to address their concerns.
Hence the appeal of the frost saints as a research topic for scientists was, in
part, the wide audience for results of any kind. The Eisheilige was also a tempting nut to crack for physical reasons. Here, after all, was a clear confrontation
between air masses of different temperatures, as Dove had been the first to
point out. Dove understood the frost saints as the last gasp of the polar current
in its springtime struggle against tropical air. It carried such a chill, he said,
because it blew from the region of melting ice in Labrador and Greenland.24
An alternative explanation emerged in the 1870s, as scientists working in a dynamic framework became intent on explaining typical wind patterns according
to average pressure distributions. The new theory (due to Wilhelm Bezold
and W. J. von Bebber in Germany) started from the observation that, as winter
passes into spring, land warms faster than water. Over a large landmass like the
plains of Hungary and southeastern Europe, the warmer air will rise and create
a low-pressure center at the surface. This low will allow cold air from the north
to flow in, across central Europe, bringing a cold snap as it goes. Noting that
these episodes were preceded by unusually warm temperatures in Hungary,
Bezold nicknamed the cold spells “native Hungarians” ( geborene Ungarn), a
name that German-speaking scientists in Austria couldn’t resist repeating.25
The theory of the “native Hungarians” became a hit with the popular press.
Local German-language papers in Tyrol, Upper and Lower Austria, Bohemia, and Moravia carried articles that affirmed the reality of a phenomenon
previously known only from popular lore. The Linzer Tagespost declared that
explaining the Eisheilige was “one of the most difficult tasks of modern meteorology.”26 And the Innsbrucker Nachrichten reported that here for once
was a case in which scientists had decided to take popular lore seriously.27 In
Transylvania, Ludwig/Lajos Reissenberger (1819– 95) brought the dynamic

180

Chapter Seven

perspective to his neighbors at the local Natural Scientific Society. Reissenberger was a Berlin-educated gymnasium teacher and meteorologist in Hermannstadt/Nagyszeben/Sibiu and had been a corresponding member of the
ZAMG since its founding. He took an active role in organizing local scientific
societies and in stimulating popular interest in meteorology. In his research,
he took a particular interest in correlations between temperature variability
and mortality. In taking up the question of the Eismänner, Reissenberger explained that what had been missing until recently was an understanding of
how the pressure distribution governs flows of air— precisely the question on
which Hann was working.28
These articles invited readers to consider their local climate from a synoptic
perspective: to track the course of a cold spell as it swept across Europe from
Sweden to Russia. As we will see in further detail below, the dynamic theory of
climate offered nonscientists not only a compelling interpretation of a familiar
phenomenon like late spring cold spells; it also provided a way to imagine
central Europe as a physical unit, a space of atmospheric flows.

“ H e D i e d o f F r e s h M o u n ta i n A i r , B i r d S o n g ,
and the Scent of Roses”
Climatology captured the attention of many middle-class Habsburg subjects
in the late nineteenth century as a means of taking control of personal health.
Medical climatology placed heavy emphasis on the collection of empirical data,
including the climatic characteristics and physiological effects of mountains,
seacoasts and the open sea, steppe and desert. Textbooks in the field gave detailed accounts of the workings of meteorological instruments and insisted that
the medical man must carry out his own climatic measurements. Climatology,
in this view, was about firsthand observation, not theoretical study. Wilhelm
Prausnitz, whose research and teaching at the Hygiene Institute in Graz included the health effects of indoor climates, insisted that “it is not possible to
‘study’ hygiene from a book. Hygienic research methods in particular must
not only be seen but also tested out.”29 In 1901 the Austrian Society of Apothecaries took a field trip to the ZAMG, where members were fascinated by the
profusion of instruments on display:
It will certainly be of interest to everyone to know the climate of his place of
residence and to pay closer attention to it. However, the climate can only be determined if one investigates precisely and at regular intervals the current state
of the atmosphere— that is, the size and variation of air pressure, temperature,

The Power of Local Differences 181

humidity, electrical and optical phenomena, as well as the air currents produced by the air pressure, the winds, the various and distinct forms of water
vapor (clouds, fog, frost, dew) and the aqueous forms of precipitation (rain,
snow, hail, sleet).30

While the pressure of the atmosphere may seem to be a factor that escapes
direct human perception, changes in air pressure were widely believed to affect
physical and mental health. This belief was supported by evidence collected
by researchers of the ZAMG, who studied the effects of changing air pressure
on the health of students, workers, and hospital patients.31
The results of medical climatological research were widely disseminated
to both physicians and their patients. The Österreichische Badezeitung (later
Österreichisch-Ungarische Badezeitung) launched in 1871 and published continuously for a quarter century. It was followed by the shorter-lived Vierteljahrschrift fur Klimatologie, mit besonderer Rucksicht auf klimatischer Kurorte,
the Bade- und Reisejournal, the Illustrierte Fachzeitschrit fur Kurorte, Hotels,
Sanatorien, Reise und Sport, and other periodicals with a similar orientation.
These aimed to communicate the latest research on medical climatology to
experts and nonexperts alike. As the Vierteljahrschrift fur Klimatologie announced in its first issue: “The support and dissemination of our knowledge
of climate, above all of its effects on human life and health, forms the charge
of this quarterly journal. The scope and importance of this knowledge in its
present stage of development more than justifies its compilation in its own
periodical, and one intended not only for physicians but for educated readers
in general.”32 Atmospheric dynamics was also introduced in reference works
like Enoch Kisch’s Klimatotherapie and Wilhelm Prausnitz’s Grundzuge der
Hygiene.33
This was an era when medical thinking was torn between environmentalist
and contagionist explanations of disease. It’s worth noting that the Habsburg
state had reason to resist contagionism, since it implied the necessity of quarantine during outbreaks of cholera in southeastern Europe. Austria’s commercial class lobbied against quarantines, as barriers to commercial exchange.
Thus Austrian medical experts pursued public health alternatives to quarantines in the Balkans and the Levant— for instance, overseeing a trial program
of sanitary reform and medical education in Constantinople.34
At the same time, ideas of what might constitute a “healthy climate” were
shifting. By the close of the nineteenth century, Habsburg physicians agreed
that the healthiness of a climate was relative rather than absolute. There was no
single cure-all location. A given climate could be salubrious for some individuals

182

Chapter Seven

but not for others, beneficial in some seasons but pernicious in others. As the
medical director of the spa at Marienbad, Enoch Kisch (1841– 1918) wrote in
1898, the last decades of the nineteenth century had seen a striking expansion
in both the variety of diseases for which doctors advised climatic cures and
the range of climates seen as potentially therapeutic. Earlier in the nineteenth
century, taking a climatic cure had meant traveling to a “southern” land. Now,
cold climates were almost as likely to be prescribed, even in winter.35
What’s more, physicians often specifically recommended movement between one climate and another. For respiratory disorders, for instance, the best
thing was “a change of climate,” whether that might mean a “lengthy stay in
the valley and in the mountains, in the south and on the coasts, in a mountain
forest and the open sea.” This advice built on the Hippocratic principle, in
morbis longis solum mutare (in tedious diseases to change the place of residence). Variety rather than constancy of climate was recommended for a host
of other diseases as well— scrofula (a skin disease associated with tuberculosis), diabetes, arthritis, heart and nerve ailments, “as well as various illnesses of
the nervous system and the sexual organs.” Exposing the body to multiple climates was said to serve the fundamental purpose of “enhancing organ function
and improving total nutrition.” In short, “change of climate is to be regarded as
a common foundation of all climate cures.”36 Often, what a sick body needed
was a change of air, any change. To be sure, this could cause the body strain,
but after a few days the process of acclimatization was usually complete.
The most important factor to consider was the climatic character of a health
resort relative to the patient’s most recent abode. “Therefore what must be
considered is not so much the absolute temperature of the climatic resort
to which an invalid is sent, but the difference between the temperature from
which he is departing and the one to which he will arrive.” In this sense, there
was a kernel of medical truth in a verse about the hypochondriac who “died of
fresh mountain air, bird song, and the scent of roses.” This school of thought
was not without influence even among military men. Take, for instance, the
Habsburg naval officer Karl Weyprecht, who led the Austro-Hungarian Polar
Expedition of 1872– 74. Weyprecht argued counterintuitively that his crew of
sailors from the Adriatic was uniquely well prepared for their Arctic journey,
having been seasoned for abrupt climate change by the inherent variability of
their native climate.37
In this way, climate became a dynamic and relational concept, and the relocated body of the patient became a register of geographic difference. The
relational character of climate was accentuated by medical textbooks of the day
that explained climate therapy in terms of basic atmospheric dynamics. The

The Power of Local Differences 183

new dynamic climatology taught that local conditions were not sui generis;
they depended on prevailing winds and thus on the large-scale pressure distribution.38 In this way, climate therapy furnished the patient with a kinesthetic
experience of Austria-Hungary’s natural diversity. Between the ocean and the
steppe lay the many therapeutic climates of the Habsburg lands, endlessly diverse and yet in perpetual interaction with each other. “Thus it is the winds,”
wrote Kisch in Marienbad, citing Julius Hann, “that erase climatic borders and
maintain neighboring climatic regions in constant communication.”39

“ S t r i v i n g t o wa r d s t h e B a l a n c i n g O u t
of Extremes”
Dynamic climatology was quickly integrated into the geographical surveys
of Austria-Hungary that publishing houses churned out with increasing frequency starting in the 1870s. In his widely read accounts of the climate of the
Habsburg lands, Josef Roman Lorenz showed how local contrasts of temperature and pressure formed and were then “balanced out” by means of moving
air currents: “The movements of the atmosphere derive from the same causes
as those of the fluid envelope of the earth. In the atmosphere, temperature
differences between horizontally and vertically adjacent layers of air are the
stimulus to the drive towards the balancing out of extremes.” Consider, for
instance, Lorenz’s account of the bora, a cold, dry wind that blows along the
Dalmatian coast, on the Monarchy’s southern periphery, where Lorenz had
spent six years teaching high school and studying the coastal climate and its
flora and fauna (see figure 26). The bora arose from the confrontation between
two masses of air representing “the starkest opposition”: a stationary mass
of cold, dense air in the interior and the warm air on the Adriatic side of the
Dinaric Alps. The strength of the bora depended on the magnitude of this
contrast and the size of the air masses.
If the opposition lasts for a while and is significant along a fair distance, then
an inland current will flow for a period of time and draw as its replacement
air masses from ever more distant regions to the north; in this way, in a Bora
lasting several days, the temperature drops ever lower. . . . If the opposition is
either merely local, or insignificant, then a narrow or weak inland wind will suffice for the equilibration, and a short local Bora or a moderate Borino will arise.

From a physical perspective, this analysis was rudimentary, neglecting the rising and falling motion of the air as it crossed the mountains. As a framework

184 Chapter Seven

F i g u r e 2 6 . The Dalmatian coast during a bora wind.

for geography, however, it was revelatory. Suddenly, the Dinaric Alps— long
regarded as the dividing line between an oceanic climate and a continental one,
between coastal civilization and mountain backwardness— no longer seemed
quite so stark a barrier. The bora represented a sign of the true “interdependence” of regions across apparent borders.40
One of the most influential popularizers of geography in Austria-Hungary
was Friedrich Umlauft (1844– 1923). A protégé of Friedrich Simony, Umlauft
was a gymnasium instructor who shared Simony’s commitment to “wholestate” geography and the communication of scientific research to the public.
The stated aim of his 1876 “Geographical-Statistical Handbook” of the Monarchy was to illustrate the interdependence and mutual determination of Land
und Leute, or nature and culture. Austria-Hungary was characterized by “the

The Power of Local Differences 185

harshest [grellste] oppositions with respect to physical conditions, population,
and intellectual culture— which is why the Monarchy is rightly called a state
of contrasts.”41 To do justice to such multiplicity without losing sight of the
whole, Umlauft divided the territory according to Lorenz’s system of climatic
zones, based on rainfall and temperature. In this way, each region “maintains
its position within the great climatic provinces of Europe,” while “peculiarities are highlighted that are revealed under closer observation.” In general,
he explained, climate was the result of prevailing winds, and winds were the
effect of a “balancing out” of differences of air pressure: “The distribution
of air pressure, when disturbed by the uneven distribution of heat, are the
stimulus to the drive towards the balancing out of extremes, to air currents.”
Umlauft applied these same images of natural flows when he turned to ethnographic description. He saw no hard-and-fast divisions among Austria’s
peoples, which included representatives of “all the main cultural groups of
Europe.” “Thus Austria’s history converges with that of Germany, Hungary,
and Poland, similarly to the confluence of different streams at different stages in
a large riverbed, which then carries these waters along collectively.” The Monarchy was thus a space of circulation and mixing, whether one attended to air,
water, or human populations. “The nations mentioned do not occupy sharply
defined and enclosed areas, but rather are interspersed in many regions. Thus
in such border districts one often finds a uniquely mixed population. Indeed,
nowhere in Europe can the intermixing of various nationalities be observed
as strikingly as in our fatherland.”42 Umlauft’s physical analogies served to
naturalize his ethnographic observations.
While Dove and the later Norwegian school of meteorology chose images
of “struggle” and “battle” to describe confrontations between divergent air
masses, Austrian climatologists preferred the language of mixing, equilibration, exchange, and mutual dependence. Thus, as Dr. Kisch explained in his
medical guide, winds were a force for “interdependence” and the “erasure of
borders.” To describe this interaction between contrasting air currents— and
to circumvent the question of how their contrasts were maintained— Austrian
climatologists even revived the Romantic concept of an ausfullende Bewegung
or self-fulfilling movement. Felix Exner, for instance, employed this archaic
term in his otherwise highly technical 1925 textbook Dynamic Meteorology.43
The concept of self-fulfilling movement was associated with the highly influential early nineteenth-century geographer Carl Ritter. It expressed a Leibnizian
view of the cosmos simultaneously as a totality and an evolving configuration of
moving parts. Ritter argued that the geographic relations among physical elements, as among human cultures, are always in flux, thanks to new technologies

186

Chapter Seven

of observation, communication, and transportation. “What formerly was distant and unreachable, now approaches into closer contact, even into the realm
of daily interaction.” Thus for Ritter, the category of self-fulfilling movement
included all manner of atmospheric and oceanic circulations and the organic
responses they called forth, as well as the migrations of peoples and the intentional transformations of spatial relations wrought by human agency.44 Analogously, an Austrian treatise in dynamic climatology posited that an air current
with a component in the direction of the pressure gradient “strives to attenuate
the contrasts; it is a ‘self-fulfilling movement.’”45 Readers of the day would have
recognized this allusion to a Romantic cosmology of continuously regenerating variety. In this way, climatology lent physical plausibility to the Habsburg
ideal of unity in diversity.

The Dynamics of Local Differences
In 1881, Alexander Supan published one of the first major monographs to
apply atmospheric dynamics to the explanation of the climatic characteristics
of the regions of the globe.46 Alongside Coffin and Voeikov’s 1875 Winds of the
Globe, it was, in the words of Alfred Hettner, “the first approach to a physiological or genetic treatment of the climates of the earth.”47 Leaning heavily on
Hann’s observations and interpretations, Supan began by laying out the most
recent conclusions concerning the relationship between winds and the distribution of air pressure. From there he moved on to an overview of the major
wind systems of the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. Finally, the bulk of
the book discussed each region of the world in turn, including tables of average
wind frequencies, most of which he calculated directly from the station data,
provided by Hann. In each case, he showed how the typical locations of primary and secondary pressure minima and maxima could be used to explain
prevailing winds and, on that basis, known characteristics of the regional climate at different times of year— for instance, the typically warm winters along
the Norwegian coast, or the extremely cool summers of Novaya Zemlya.
It was shortly after the publication of his treatise on winds that Supan began
to reflect on the significance of Hann’s insight for the discipline of geography
more broadly. These were the years of a contentious struggle among geographers to define their field over and against the disciplines that increasingly
encroached on geography’s domain— sciences like geology, meteorology, economics, and anthropology. Geographers saw their discipline fracturing into
narrow specializations. In the ensuing debates, Supan took a leading role,
forcefully defending the unity of his discipline. His methodological pronounce-

The Power of Local Differences 187

ments resonated well beyond Austria-Hungary, influencing future thinkers
from Lenin to the Weimar school of geopolitics.48
At the German Geographers’ Congress of 1889, Supan laid out his vision
for the future of geographical research. The key to holding together the physical and human aspects of geography lay in raising the “special” or “chorographic” part of geography to the level of “chorology”— to go, in other words,
beyond systematic description, toward causal analysis. The Austrian Problem
was not far from his mind, as indicated by his critique of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire in Word and Image for its failure to synthesize its multiauthored descriptions into a higher unity, to transcend chorography and achieve chorological insight. Supan proceeded to illustrate what he meant by chorology.
Chorology was the study of the reciprocal relations between nature and man.
In this respect, it rejected the environmental determinism of Friedrich Ratzel’s
anthropogeography. The first stage of chorological research was to mark out
“geographic localities” that displayed homogenous conditions of orography,
climate, vegetation, perhaps also fauna and minerals. Crucially, the influence
of any given “geographic locality” on its human inhabitants was contingent
on conditions in neighboring “localities.” That is, how a human group adapts
to its surroundings and exploits its local resources will depend on how those
surroundings and resources differ from those of neighboring regions. As relationships of interregional interdependence grow, interactions between man
and nature within each region will shift accordingly. Thus Supan’s key insight
was that natural conditions “guide the social development of their inhabitants
in a particular direction”— not in any simple deterministic sense, but by fostering a relationship of interdependence, or potentially conflict, with another
locality differing from the first in its natural conditions.49
This vision of neighborly difference underlay the research program that
Supan prescribed for geography. It consisted in the study of the relationships
between natural-human regions, their evolving interdependence. As he put it,
“The power of neighboring geographic contrasts, which strive to balance each
other out, is one of the most significant formative forces in the life of a nation.”
The mission of geography, Supan insisted, was to characterize these neighboring contrasts and to investigate the relations of dependence and conflict
between neighboring societies to which they gave rise.
His choice to refer to these environmental contrasts repeatedly as Kräfte,
forces, is telling. Supan had been among the first scholars to pursue climatology as the study of the atmospheric motions arising from gradients of pressure
or temperature. Only six years later, in 1887, he was turning this program into
an agenda for the study of politics and culture. As this suggests, imperial-royal

188

Chapter Seven

scientists like Supan and Hann found the dynamic interpretation of climate
compelling partly because of the analogies it suggested. Indeed, Supan relied
on the pressure-wind relationship as the organizing principle of his volume on
Austria-Hungary for the Länderkunde von Europa series (1889). Faced with
the task of producing an overview of the multinational state, Supan, like Hann,
seized on an interpretive method that recast difference as continuity. It was in
the context of this overview that Supan penned the programmatic lines: “All
living things blossom forth from the balancing out of neighboring contrasts.
To ascertain these contrasts and describe their influence on men: this we see
as our scientific responsibility.”50

T h e P o l i t i c s o f E q u i l i b r at i o n
To be sure, “the balancing out of neighboring contrasts” was only the roughest
first approximation to a description of atmospheric dynamics. Yet it carried
the authority of physical science. In yet another play on the terminology of
force, Supan argued that his proposed method would give chorology more
“wissenschaftliche Kräfte,” scientific force.51 He was prescribing for international geography most generally a research program that Austrian scholars
had already adopted in the name of imperial unity. As we have seen, it had
become a commonplace among imperial-royal scholars that the confrontation
between dissimilar social elements set a process of development in motion. In
the words of Alois Riegl, “when the unfamiliar meets the unfamiliar in a close
and sustained relationship the process of development is set in motion.”52
What should now be clear is that this interpretation of imperial unity rested on
an analogy developed among coordinated yet distinct disciplines concerned
with the spatial distribution of natural and cultural resources, including climatology, geography, political economy, ethnography, and art history. It was a
vision of the empire as a circulatory system, in which energy was released from
a tension between local gradients.
Such was the powerful metaphor that coupled dynamic climatology to imperial ideology. When Habsburg scientists discussed the relationship between
pressure gradient and wind, a cultural-economic analogy was implicit: difference
creates circulation and thus cultural continuity and interdependence— literally,
unity in diversity, or “the balancing out of neighboring contrasts.”
The analogy was particularly resonant in the wake of the 1867 Ausgleich
between Austria and Hungary, which granted Hungary domestic autonomy
and recreated the empire as the Dual Monarchy. Typically translated as “compromise” or “settlement,” the word Ausgleich was often used interchangeably

The Power of Local Differences 189

with Ausgleichung, literally an “equilibration” or “balancing out.” It was in this
sense that Supan used the term Ausgleichung in his 1889 treatise on AustriaHungary, where he wrote, both literally and metaphorically, of the balancing
out of neighboring contrasts.
The slippage between Ausgleich and Ausgleichung was strategically employed by Habsburg-loyal writers to naturalize the 1867 status quo. The liberal statesman Gyula (Julius) Andrassy, instrumental in negotiating the compromise, lost his seat in the Hungarian parliament because he was perceived
as overly sympathetic to Vienna. While out of office, Andrassy published a
defense of Hungary’s ties to Austria that drew on both historical and geographic arguments. Andrassy portrayed modern Hungary as a “small country”
that could not survive independently. Austria was its natural partner because
its borders were impossible to defend without Hungary’s aid. The Ausgleich
was the outcome of an increasing intensification of “differences” (Gegensätze)
between the two countries: “Every human being, every organism composed
of a group of human beings, can only survive through the balancing out of differences [nur durch die Ausgleichung der Gegensätze fortbestehen].” Andrassy
thus presented the Ausgleich as the solution to a problem of disequilibrium.
The goal remained to reestablish a state of balance: “Who can predict whether
the old harmony will ever be reestablished, whether the oppositional drives
will result in a new compromise, whether the means can indeed be found with
which to bring the impending avalanche to a halt.”53 The pivotal term here was
the German word Ausgleich. To nineteenth-century ears, it did not simply connote a diplomatic compromise. Far more vividly, it implied a physical process
by which opposing forces were maintained in dynamic equilibrium.

T h e o r i e s o f C i rc u l at i o n
Dynamic climatology illustrated how diversity could be the motor of
circulation— and how circulation could in turn “even out” the starkest of oppositions. This proved to be a fertile point of view for the field of political
economy. It offered a vivid, physical analogy for the hope that Austria’s natural
oppositions would generate economic interdependence and therefore political
unity.
The rise of dynamic climatology coincided with a spatial turn in central
European political economy. This new departure leaned on the ideas of Johann Heinrich von Thunen (1783– 1850), a north German landowner and agricultural improver. In 1811 von Thunen had attempted to derive the optimal
geographic distribution of economic production. He assumed the existence

190

Chapter Seven

of a single city with a single road leading out of it and a uniform natural environment. Based on the transport time from the site of production to the urban
market, von Thunen posited that zones of agricultural production would develop as rings of increasing radius from the city center: first a zone of vegetable
gardens, then zones of forestry, grain farming, and distilleries. Beyond a certain
radius, agriculture would no longer be profitable, and the land would be useful
only for hunting. Crude as this model may have been, central European scholars developed it as a tool for thinking through the expanding scale of trade in
the nineteenth century. Their interest lay in the dynamic relationship between
environmental, technological, or demographic change and the expansion or
contraction of the economy.54
This line of inquiry led, for instance, to some of the first attempts to visualize Austria-Hungary’s position within what the Vienna-based economic
geographer Franz Neumann-Spallart (1837– 88) called the “world economic
organism.”55 From his start as an expert on Austro-Hungarian trade statistics,
Neumann-Spallart moved on to developing methods for achieving an international economic “overview.” To that end, Neumann-Spallart suggested that
economics model itself on climatology. In both cases, the question was how to
“represent statistically” “the economic situation of a state in its entirety over
a certain time interval”:
This is a task that may be compared to the one that meteorology has to solve
when it is supposed to determine the climatic character of a region. Just as the
climate is in a certain sense the complex result of the interactions of a great
number of interdependent elements, likewise what we call the economic situation [wirtschaftliche Lage] is the totality of a series of individual facts that
express the degree of strength and health of the material life of a given population. In both cases . . . it is a matter of the analytical groundwork for the
disaggregation of a holistic impression into its essential constitutive factors.
However, meteorology finds factors such as air pressure, temperature, humidity, direction and strength of the wind, etc., which are genuine elements or
factors of the situation, for which it possesses precise measuring instruments;
and, by generalizing on the basis of a causal law, it can draw a conclusion from
a single series of observations for all similar cases. Economic statistics, on
the other hand, must rest content with surrogates for these natural-scientific
methods.56

Otherwise put, climatology furnished political economy with an exemplary
model of multicausal reasoning. Although economists did not have precise,

The Power of Local Differences 191

causal laws to work with, nonetheless they too could analyze a complex state
of affairs into its causally significant component factors.
Climatology also offered economics a model of spatial analysis, as Emanuel
Herrmann argued in 1872. At that time, Herrmann was a docent at the Vienna
Commercial Academy and an adviser to the imperial education ministry; from
1882 to 1902, he taught as a full professor of national economy at the Technical University in Vienna. Historians of economic thought have associated
Herrmann with the subjectivist turn, because he explicitly sought to model
economics on natural science. Yet Herrmann’s model was not Newtonian
physics but rather the empirical, geographical, historical, and statistical fields
of natural history and climatology. Like a naturalist in pursuit of the diversity
of life, Herrmann was fascinated by the variability of economic life across time
and space. Like the naturalist, he sought to interpret the geography of economic activity in terms of interactions among general laws, local conditions,
and historical trajectories. Indeed, he viewed the discipline of economics as
continuous with evolutionary biology and human anthropology. Thus Herrmann noted that there was a telling affinity between von Thunen’s circles of
uniform economic production and Alexander von Humboldt’s lines of equal
temperature or “isotherms.” “The lines of equal conditions of production in
relation to an urban market form isotherms of a sort.”57 Herrmann noted that
these two representational devices had been introduced to the world within
a decade of each other.58 He went on to construct an elaborate analogy between economic and climatic geography, likening “demand” to heat in its capacity to create “tropical” zones of economic growth.59 Physical geography
thus supplied Austrian economists not only with empirical data and statistical methods, but also with a new model for the spatial analysis of economic
relations. Once von Thunen’s rational approach had been adapted to allow
for geographic variability, it suggested how economics could be transformed
into a science: not as an abstract mechanics, but as an observational discipline
modeled on physical geography.
Another exponent of this new spatial economics was Emil Sax, an
independent-minded member of the circle around Carl Menger in Vienna.
Like Neumann-Spallart, Sax set out to adapt von Thunen’s analysis to the
“new scale of global commerce” and analyze the impact of new modes of transportation. Before the coming of the railway and steamship, Hungary had been
in the fifth or sixth von Thunen zone from Vienna. Subsequently, Hungarian
cattle farmers now had to compete with those in Galicia; at the same time, it became easier to transport grain from Hungary to Vienna. So Hungarian farmers
turned increasingly to grain, and the price of grain in the Alpine lands fell ac-

192

Chapter Seven

cordingly. As Sax interpreted these shifts, improvements in transportation had
increased “the value of these natural regions” by raising the “marketability”
[Absatzfähigkeit] of their products.60 Thus the modern transportation network
allowed Austria-Hungary to profit fully from the complementarity of its natural
regions. In this vein, from 1900 to 1904, the liberal prime minister Ernst von
Koerber promoted a vast program of economic development and integration,
including a broad network of canals and railways— all intended, in his words,
to “reduce the nationality strife” by paving a “road . . . free for the spiritual and
economic development of the State.”61
Liberals like Sax and Koerber were not alone in developing this spatial perspective on the economic life of the Monarchy. Karl Renner, one of the leading
minds of the Social Democratic Party, disagreed with Sax about the railway’s
impact on Austria-Hungary, but he too emphasized the crucial significance
of physical geography for the socioeconomic life of the Monarchy. The very
possibility of imperial unity depended on the physical form of the territory.62
More importantly, Renner echoed Sax on the value of natural diversity for the
economic health of the state:
To a superficial gaze it seems natural and adaptive that a commercial center
lies at the center of a homogeneous region. Nothing is falser than this. Trade is
the exchange of what a homogeneous region has in excess, in return for what
it lacks; [trade therefore] always thrives on the region’s periphery— that is, the
space where contact is made between soils of one type and another, between
one nation and another. . . . There, where mountains give way to plains, where
the mouth of a river connects land and sea, where industrial land borders agricultural land, there the city arises.

Renner interpreted this geographical interdependence dialectically: “Dissimilarity of the parts and autarchy of the whole is the characteristic of all state
formation, particularly of the large state. . . . Thus, opposites are incorporated
into its being [Dasein] in order to be transcended [aufzuheben].” Applied to
Austria-Hungary, this became an Austro-Marxist argument for the advantages
of the supranational state in terms of the value of natural diversity: “Here are
united not only agricultural and industrial land but also agricultural lands of
the most different structures: forest, pasture, fields of rye, wheat, barley, beets,
and animal feed, vineyards and orchards, land for horses and cattle.”63
Although neither Sax nor Renner referred explicitly to dynamic climatology, all these analyses, economic and climatological alike, derived from the
same “whole-state” discourse that assumed local contrasts to be a motor of

The Power of Local Differences 193

circulation and, therefore, a force for unity. Climatic diversity, in particular,
figured as the basis for a spatial division of labor that set trade in motion. As an
article in the Militärzeitung from 1866 awkwardly expressed this atmospheric
analogy:
World trade in its broadest significance is the law of the flows that have as their
medium the unevenness of nature and of cultural productions that are determined by climates and soils, and that have as their stimulus the compensatory
[ausgleichend] efforts of man within the confines of his nature and needs—
efforts whose geographical and historical origins, due to the infinitely complex
composition of these needs, are almost as difficult to fathom as meteorological
phenomena, which even today often have the appearance of hieroglyphs.64

It was not just that diversity propelled commercial exchange. Forms of
circulation— atmospheric, economic, migratory— in turn served to smooth
out stark contrasts. This was the image of the Monarchy evoked by the
Ljubljana-based commercial geographer Franz Heiderich at the opening of
the International Economics Workshop for economists and entrepreneurs,
held in Vienna in 1910. Tasked with instructing the foreign guests on the “natural conditions” of Austria-Hungary’s “economic life,” Heiderich began with
the obligatory description of the Monarchy’s “pronounced geographic and
economic contrasts.” Yet nature and man had conspired to moderate these
contrasts and stitch together the parts:
By means of deposits from the rivers and the Ice-Age glaciers, the mountains
have acquired gentler slopes along the plains, and the wind-blown deposits
as well as the sediments from slowly shrinking bodies of water have further
diminished the vertical difference in height and have connected differently
formed regions. In this way Nature itself has erased the sharp tectonic borders
and replaced them with gradual transitions and wide border zones. Across
these flow, from one natural region [Landschaftsgebiet] to the next, cultural,
economic, and political forms of life, at first distributed in colonies and then
gradually coalescing. . . . The Monarchy can thus be regarded as a unity in
a physical sense, its various parts solidly cemented together just like a giant
breccia.65

Here Heiderich introduced two geological metaphors for Habsburg unity:
one, the image of the Monarchy as a giant breccia— a rock formed of angular
fragments, cemented together by the flow of debris. Its components retained

194

Chapter Seven

their individuality, yet were bound together by a natural, irresistible process.
The second image was a geological variant on a climatological metaphor: the
equilibration of neighboring contrasts. In this case, gradients of elevation
rather than pressure are evened out by a natural process of weathering. In this
way, Heiderich cast empire-building as a natural process, akin to erosion, as
unstoppable as the flow of wind and water.
Climate’s economic significance was thus both literal and figurative. On the
one hand, climatic oppositions set trade in motion. On the other, atmospheric
circulation was an apt metaphor for the conciliatory effects of trade: “The
exchange of goods and money is colorless like waves of air.”66
Finally, the convergence of climatology and political economy in late imperial Austria cast new light on the future of industrial Europe. As Herrmann
put it, modern man tended to think only in terms of immediate causes. But the
earth sciences suggested a more appropriate scale for economic thought. The
universe itself was a system of sustainable production, an “enduring economy
[Wechselwirthschaft, literally crop rotation] of light, heat, gas, earth, waters.”
“The coal that warms our ovens was a verdant tree hundreds of millions of
years ago, which, with so many others, was suddenly destroyed by a storm
and washed over by the sea. The petroleum in our lamps derives from the
fat of a fish. . . . But the earth must have compressed these stocks for millions
or at least thousands of years like a protective container for us to be able to
consume them unthinkingly today.”67 Even the milk and butter of a European
breakfast must be seen as the product of millions of years of mammalian evolution. Alarmed at the rapid pace of resource exhaustion in the 1880s, Herrmann
called for a worldwide organization to survey the earth’s stocks and agree on
their allocation.
*
In short, climatology can be said to have contributed a kinesthetic basis to the
imperial ideology of unity in diversity. That is, familiarity with the observation
of atmospheric phenomena and with the mapping of meteorological elements
offered an intuitive, embodied way for scientists and nonscientists alike to
imagine the space of the empire. The atmospheric dynamics communicated in
atlases, newspapers, and medical guides taught Habsburg subjects to experience the wind as a force for the balancing out of oppositions. The idea that nature decreed the Ausgleichung of local differences lent support to the ongoing
politics of Ausgleich in the late nineteenth century, as Bohemians, Galicians,
and South Slavs each demanded their own “settlement”/“equilibration” with

The Power of Local Differences 195

Vienna. In the fields of medicine and political economy, appeals to the “balancing out of neighboring contrasts” grounded arguments for the benefits of the
multinational state to the health and prosperity of its inhabitants. By the 1890s
this simple model of atmospheric dynamics had captured the imagination of
Habsburg citizens, expert and lay. It provided a vivid physical image of the
emergence of unity out of diversity.
Much of the work of Habsburg climatology after 1900 went into refining this
idealized picture of atmospheric circulation in order to understand how it resulted in the sensible characteristics of local climates. However, “the balancing
out of neighboring contrasts” was but a first approximation to a description of
atmospheric dynamics. As scientists today would put it, the pressure gradient
only determines the winds under the simplifying conditions of geostrophic
flow. Only in this case can the pressure difference be maintained and the wind
remain constant, since the wind blows perpendicular to the gradient.68 By the
1890s, however, the ideological force of this model made it seem self-evident.
As we will see in the next section, it would take an outsider to question it.

A “ U n i q u e ly O d d F e l l o w ”
Of all the accomplished individuals working at the ZAMG circa 1900, Max
Margules is, ironically, the only one whose name is commonly remembered
today. Among atmospheric physicists, Margules is best known as the author
of the “tendency equation,” a cornerstone of early computerized weather forecasting, and the inventor of the concept of available potential energy, long
central to the work of climate modelers.69 Some textbooks of atmospheric
physics will tell you that Margules worked in Vienna circa 1900, that he was
known as something of an oddball, and that he met a tragic end. In fact, he
left behind few clues to illuminate the mysteries of his life. The irony of Margules’s fame today is that in his own lifetime he was a liminal figure in the
circles of imperial-royal science. A Jew in a casually anti-Semitic academic
world, he was never a contender for a high-ranking post. Socially awkward by
some reports, Margules has gone down in history as a loner, as someone who
worked, to quote one textbook, in “intellectual isolation.”70 There is indeed
evidence that he was an intensely private man. The archives hold no more
than a few terse manuscripts on physical chemistry, the topic he took up after
abandoning atmospheric physics in 1906. Even his published papers are dense
with equations, short on words. And yet the claim that Margules was isolated
from his milieu remains to be evaluated. His story must be pieced together
from government records and the posthumous recollections of his colleagues.

196

Chapter Seven

F i g u r e 2 7 . Max Margules (1856– 1920).

Margules was born to a Jewish family in the primarily Jewish town of Brody,
in eastern Galicia, in 1856. He moved to Vienna for his last two years of gymnasium, where he lived in the Jewish quarter of Leopoldstadt. He studied
physics at the University of Vienna and then, in 1879– 80, at the University of
Berlin. The chair of physics at Berlin was then Hermann von Helmholtz, who
had recently returned to the study of atmospheric discontinuities. Margules
was not well prepared to contribute to this inquiry, having trained as a mathematical physicist with a focus on electromagnetism. Nor had he experienced
the leisurely childhood in the Alps that had set many of his colleagues on the
path to a geoscientific career. Nonetheless, he turned his focus to the science
of the atmosphere.
For twenty years, interrupted only by his stay in Berlin, Margules served as
an assistant, adjunct, and then secretary at the ZAMG. He was hired in 1877
in part to work on the institute’s yearbook, which had fallen far behind its
publication schedule due to the arduous labor of reducing data from the fastgrowing station network. Margules succeeded so well that by 1885 the year-

The Power of Local Differences 197

book for 1883 was in press. Likely due to his knowledge of a Slavic language,
he was put in charge of maintaining communication with the weather stations
in the eastern and southern portions of the Monarchy.71 As we saw in chapter
4, the ZAMG’s network was unevenly spread across the crown lands, and its
early directors made it a priority to increase the density of observations from
regions like Galicia, Bukovina, and Dalmatia. Margules made this goal his own.
He expressed satisfaction at seeing stations established in poorly represented
areas.72 By 1888, he was responsible for reviewing the observations submitted by all the stations of the network and preparing them for publication. He
was also in charge of inspecting stations in Galicia, Bukovina, Dalmatia, and
Bosnia and Herzegovina— to which was soon added Austrian Silesia, Upper
Hungary, and Transylvania.73 These inspection tours took Margules to the
distant reaches of the empire, from where he reported on the quality of observers and observations. Back in Vienna, he took pains to stay in contact
with observers in these parts.74 Margules also took charge of reducing vast
amounts of raw data.75 Not one for collaboration, he would nonetheless occasionally surprise colleagues with a sheaf of measurement values, on which
observations relevant to their research had been highlighted with his signature
red pen.76
Although Margules is thought of as a “fundamental” researcher who worked
“in isolation,” his research questions were firmly embedded in the program
of imperial-royal science. His most lasting contributions began as an interrogation of the central metaphor of Habsburg climatology: the potential of local
differences to power an integrative circulation.

I n t e r r o g a t i n g t h e C e n t r a l M e ta p h o r
What Margules realized in the 1890s was that existing scales of observation
failed to capture the phenomena of relevance to a quantitative evaluation of
this model of atmospheric motion. The stations of the ZAMG’s network were
irregularly spaced, and even at its densest in Carinthia there was no more
than one station for every three square miles.77 This made it impossible to
track phenomena like squall lines, with dimensions of roughly one hundred
kilometers. And so Margules defined a new scale of observation. That is, he
constructed climatology’s first purpose-built mesoscale observing network,
comprising four stations arrayed at a sixty-kilometer radius from Vienna.78
Observations from this network would be used to determine the relationship
between observed pressure gradients and the force of a squall— that is, a localized storm or violent gust of wind.

198

Chapter Seven

Here was an infrastructure suited to studying the question at the top of the
institute’s research agenda: the strength of winds to be expected from what
Supan had called the “balancing out of neighboring contrasts.” The data from
the stations’ barometers and anemometers indicated that bigger pressure differentials did not, in fact, correlate with stronger winds— “not even approximately.” Margules began to suspect that pressure contrasts were not the driving
force behind atmospheric motions— that they were a “mere cogwheel in the
machine,” as he would later put it. Here was empirical evidence that the model
of a circulation powered by pressure differentials didn’t quite work. Refining
it became the new agenda of Habsburg climatology.
In his theoretical work, Margules sought to understand this situation from
first principles. Take the example of his “tendency equation,” still taught in introductory courses in atmospheric physics today and a governing equation of
many computerized climate models. The tendency equation relates a change
in pressure to the movement of air. Margules derived it in 1904 from basic
considerations about the incompressibility of air and the relationship between
air pressure and altitude.79 The pressure of the air at any point is determined
by the weight of air above it. Margules’s tendency equation (equation 1) gives
the relationship between the change in pressure at a given point and the wind
blowing toward or away from that point (neglecting friction and the rotation
of the earth). The first term is the rate of change of air pressure; the second
and third terms are the divergence of air in the horizontal plane; and the fourth
term is the air’s vertical motion. The equation says that as air flows horizontally away from a point, the pressure at that point will fall, unless balanced by
a vertical inflow of air.
(1)

∂ p ∂( pu ) ∂( pv )
+
+
+ g  h wh = 0.
∂t
∂x
∂y

Historians of meteorology have described the equation as an early attempt
at weather forecasting. The goal would be to predict a rise or fall of the barometer from observation of the wind field. The equation showed Margules
that a small error in the measurement of the wind field will skew the forecast
significantly. In the 1940s, this problem came to be dealt with by means of
“quasi-geostrophic” theory. This approach, developed by Jules Charney, used
vorticity, a measure of rotation, to arrive at approximate calculations of the
divergent flows that worried Margules. These, in any case, tend to be small
outside of the tropics. Back in 1904, however, Margules’s analysis reinforced
the skepticism with which he and his colleagues at the ZAMG already viewed
the job of weather forecasting. As Felix Exner would argue, mathematical

The Power of Local Differences 199

models of atmospheric processes were of use for explaining, not forecasting.80
Margules was unequivocal: forecasting, he said, was “immoral and dangerous
to the character of the meteorologist.”81
How then should we interpret Margules’s work toward the tendency equation? Was this an attempt to prove the practical impossibility of forecasting?
Or was he perhaps after knowledge of a different kind? Consider next a very
similar expression that Margules had published three years earlier. In this case
(equation 2), he began by balancing the work performed by an expanding
parcel of air against the work exerted by the surrounding air pressure. Equation 2 allows for a similar calculation as equation 1, assuming the change in
pressure to be small and the movement of air to be only in the horizontal
plane.
(2)

1 2
p − p RT
+
(V − V02 ) = RT 0
(∂ p / ∂t ) dt .
2
p0
p0 ∫

It is telling that equation 2 states the equivalence in the opposite order as equation 1: now a change in wind speed is to be calculated from a pressure gradient.
In other words, the interest is not in forecasting a clear or stormy day. Instead,
the question is how much motion is generated when air flows from an initial
location to a final location at which the pressure, though lower, is not constant.
Rising pressure will produce a greater final wind speed; falling pressure will
produce a lower final wind speed. Here, the motivation, as the title of the 1901
paper indicates, is to understand the “Energy of a Pressure Distribution.” In
other words, equation 2 is an expression of the motive force produced by what
Margules’s contemporaries referred to as “neighboring contrasts.”

The Atmosphere’s Store of Energy
The second key concept for which Margules is remembered today is that of
“available potential energy” (APE), which played an important part in the first
general circulation models of the 1960s and 1970s and remains central to the
analysis of the instability associated with regions of the atmosphere where temperature varies abruptly (baroclinic zones). We can define “potential energy”
as the energy stored in a system; “available potential energy” then designates
the fraction of that energy available to do work— that is, to generate motion. In
the atmosphere, this is only a small fraction of total potential energy. Margules
showed that APE (or what he called “available kinetic energy”) could be calculated as the difference between the potential energy of an initial configuration of a gas and that of a final state in which the potential energy of the gas is

200

Chapter Seven

F i g u r e 2 8 . Calculating available potential energy: initial and final states of a chamber of
gas with dividing wall removed.

reduced to a minimum, without adding or subtracting heat. A very simple case
is illustrated in figure 28. The initial state consists of air at different temperatures separated by a vertical wall. The final state is layered horizontally: gas
with higher pressure and higher temperature above, lower pressure and lower
temperature below. It is instructive at this point to note the difference between
APE and total potential energy. Imagine a horizontally stratified atmosphere
like this stable final state. It would still have gravitational potential energy, since
the molecules are above ground height. However, the system can do no work:
it cannot move to a state of lower potential energy (all molecules at ground
level) without removing heat.82
The significance of APE is that it allows one to calculate accurately something new and important: it measures the energy stored in different states of
the atmosphere and available to generate motion. This gave Margules a way to
test the presumed power of neighboring contrasts. Suppose a room five meters
high is divided in two by a sliding wall. Assume that the air on one side is at a
higher pressure than the air on the other side, with a difference of ten millimeters of mercury at ground level. Gradients of this size are often observed during
strong winds. What happens when you remove the sliding wall? According
to Margules’s calculations, the redistribution of air would generate a wind of
only 1.5 meters per second: no more than a gentle breeze. No matter how big
the room is, the answer is the same. Now consider the case in which the room
is again divided in two, but the two sides are maintained at different temperatures: 0°C (32°F) in one half, and 10°C (50°F) on the other. Remove the sliding
wall, and you’ll have a wind of .67 meters per second, somewhat lighter than a
light breeze. Not very impressive, to be sure. However, if the height of the room

The Power of Local Differences 201

were six thousand meters, the height of mid-level clouds, the speed achieved
would be twenty-three meters per second— close to a storm-strength wind.
Margules was challenging the reigning theories of cyclone formation.
Hann’s thermodynamic theory of the origin of foehn had inspired an idea
that, ironically, Hann would fight hard to disprove: the thermal theory of cyclones. This held that the churning energy of a cyclone derives, like the foehn’s
warmth, from the latent heat released by a rising current of moist air. This view
came easily in an era obsessed with the new industrial engines, since it cast
steam in the role of motive power. As Gisela Kutzbach has recounted in a masterful study, the thermal theory of cyclones became orthodoxy in the 1860s.
But Hann had never bought it. He had focused instead on the motive power of
the pressure distribution, but had been unable to explain what maintained that
distribution. Margules went further. Both his observations and his theoretical
calculations had suggested that pressure gradients were not responsible for
storm winds. So what was?
Inspired by studies of inversions and other stark temperature contrasts in
the atmosphere, Margules hypothesized that strong winds could be produced
by horizontal gradients of temperature. He reasoned that such temperature
differences create a situation in which small air currents might displace parcels
of lighter (warmer) air into colder regions, and parcels of heavier (colder) air
into warmer regions. These parcels would then experience a strong gravitational force tending to restore them to their original positions. According to
this interpretation, storm winds are the result of conditions of instability in the
atmosphere that accrue gradually until they are suddenly released by a small
movement of air. Margules introduced the fiction of the sliding wall because,
as he admitted, he was unable to explain how such unstable conditions were
maintained in the free atmosphere. He concluded that the forces “set free”
when an unstable equilibrium is disturbed “are greater than those corresponding to the largest horizontal pressure gradients that have been observed in the
atmosphere.”83
Upon publication in 1903, Margules’s theory was overlooked by many and
met resistance from some who made the effort to read it. Thus his colleague
Trabert had to defend him for having ignored vertical air currents.84 Particularly controversial was Margules’s claim that the latent heat of condensation
contributes little to the energy of most storms.85 Sir Napier Shaw contended
that Margules had set an arbitrary limit on the vertical convection of warm,
moist air, the driving force of the cyclone according to the thermal theory.86
In fact, Margules’s fundamental contribution to atmospheric dynamics would
not be recognized outside of the German-speaking world for several decades.87

202

Chapter Seven

In 1954 the pathbreaking American meteorologist Edward Lorenz seized
on Margules’s concept of APE as the quantity that would make it possible to
track the flow of energy in the atmosphere.88 Lorenz tweaked the concept in
two ways. First, he applied it not to an individual storm, as Margules had, but
to the atmosphere as a whole (which could more properly be regarded as a
closed system, in which a fixed mass of air would be redistributed within a
fixed volume). Second, he renamed it. “Available potential energy” made clear,
in a way that Margules’s “available kinetic energy” did not, that the energy in
question was stored in the form of a tension in the atmosphere. Lorenz then
showed how APE could be used to track the exchange of atmospheric energy
between large scale and small, “between zonal winds and the eddies.” In this
way, it became possible to show that larger eddies— that is, cyclones— play a
vital role by transferring enough angular momentum to the zonal flow to compensate for the energy dissipated as friction. The concept of APE thus helped
to confirm a picture of the general circulation that Julius Hann had already begun to imagine in qualitative form circa 1900, as we will see in the next chapter.

A Tragic End
For his hard work and “excellent knowledge,” Director Hann repeatedly petitioned the ministry to promote Margules and give him a raise.89 In 1890,
Margules was made an adjunct, and in 1901, he was promoted to the institute’s
secretary, the first to hold that post. Many years later, he expressed gratitude to
Hann for all that he had learned from him.90 Then, in 1897, Josef Maria Pernter
succeeded Hann as the ZAMG’s director. Pernter was a staunch and politically
active Catholic conservative, a Tyrolean patriot, and very likely an anti-Semite.
Ficker recalled: “Anyone who got to know Pernter without knowing who and
what he was, would never have guessed that this lively, combative South Tyrolian had been captured by science. . . . This product of a Jesuit education
looked more likely to be a politician or a pugnacious cardinal than the director
of a scientific institute. And if one had to write the life story of this extraordinary
man, one would have to reach the conclusion that political and religious controversies occupied him at least as much as the problems of science.” In Ficker’s
judgment, “Anyone who knew Pernter and Margules would find it lamentable
but not incomprehensible that these two men could not bear each other.”91
Pernter must have made Margules’s life at the ZAMG unbearable. It became
all too clear that he would never rise above the position of assistant. Two years
after publishing his concept of APE, Margules quit his post as secretary of the
ZAMG and abandoned meteorology for good. He explained to the education

The Power of Local Differences 203

ministry that he had fallen into conflict with his colleagues, pointing out as well
that he had been passed over repeatedly for promotions.
Director Pernter agreed to his request for early retirement, adding that Margules was an eigenartigen Sonderling, a “uniquely odd fellow.” He was “overly
sensitive,” perceived himself to be always under attack, and did not respond
well to efforts to improve his situation.92
Other colleagues described Margules far more fondly. Ficker wrote:
I had the great good fortune to arrive at the ZAMG when Margules was still active
there— and had the even greater good fortune to develop a closer relationship
with him. I remember very well . . . how he looked me over with his gray eyes,
how he then said, ‘I’ve read your Föhn study. I have here a couple years of data
charts from the Sonnblick and a valley station that I’ve prepared for you. You can
always come and tell me what you’ve found. But I won’t give you any advice. And
he stuck to that while I put together the study of the transport of cold air masses
over the central Alps. That by the way was the first meteorological investigation
that was carried out with a view to his new ideas. Only after it went to press would
he give criticism. He sure wasn’t a teacher. Once he said to me, “You should
really deal with the theoretical side now. You’ll get the math soon enough!”93

From Felix Exner, we have the following account of Margules’s tragic fate:
In the last years, when I had the privilege to visit Margules from time to time,
I found in him an enlightened, amicably disposed wise man, with no trace
of bitterness, who had given up on all the joys and vanities of the world and
who was leading the life of an urban recluse. I never left him without being
deeply impressed by the greatness of his soul. In the last years of his life there
literally was no one with whom he would communicate on a regular basis; he
was a bachelor, living alone in a small, undecorated flat without house help.
Margules, who preferred independence and freedom to everything else, wrote
to me once that he had almost nothing to eat and asked if I was still alive. Afterwards, patrons were found both in and outside Austria, who sent him some
food; and still it was not an easy task to persuade him to accept it. And so Margules died a hungry death in complete consciousness, unwilling to become a
burden to others and to take anything that was not his due.94

As much as Margules’s colleagues valued his contributions, they could not
or would not welcome him into the social world of imperial-royal science.
Margules died with the empire, another faithful Jewish servant of Franz Josef.

204

Chapter Seven

And yet, in the years around the turn of the century, Margules had made the
Austrian Problem his own. He had worked to expand the imperial observing
network both extensively and intensively and had nurtured relationships with
its observers. He was not, as is often supposed, a “lone wolf.”95 But he had
retained enough intellectual autonomy from the ideology of imperial-royal
science to put its central metaphor to an empirical test. Other Austrian researchers would follow his lead.

Chapter 8

Planetary Disturbances

Habsburg contributions to dynamic climatology elucidated phenomena at
scales ranging from the planetary down to those of agriculture and human
health. Far from being disconnected investigations, these studies built on each
other, working toward an understanding of interactions between phenomena
of such disparate dimensions. To this end, between 1903 and 1921, researchers affiliated with the ZAMG, including Margules, Schmidt, and Defant, developed two essential tools of scaling, described in this chapter: small-scale
fluid models of atmospheric motion, and a quantitative measure of turbulent
motion, applicable to flows of any dimensions.1 Putting these together with
Margules’s concept of APE (chapter 7), they were able to estimate the contribution from turbulent eddies to the flow of heat and angular momentum
between equator and poles. This added up to a revolutionary idea. Cyclones
and smaller eddies no longer appeared as “local disturbances” superimposed
on steady planetary currents. Rather, these disorderly motions came to be seen
as essential components of the atmospheric system.

Models of the Atmosphere
and Its “Disturbances”
The historian of meteorology Hans-Gunther Körber has suggested that the
opening to a “dynamic” science of the atmosphere came with the adoption
of the Copernican system in the seventeenth century. For the first time, winds
could be explained in terms of the movement of the earth. Galileo, in fact, cited
the easterly winds in the tropics as evidence of the earth’s rotation.2 And yet

206

Chapter Eight

seventeenth- and eighteenth-century natural philosophers remained wedded
to the Aristotelian schema of solar climatic zones. In 1686, Edmund Halley
interpreted a familiar wind pattern as an effect of convection: the warmth of
the sun causes air to rise at the equator, while colder air rushes in beneath to
fill the vacuum. This sets up a circulation that corresponds roughly to the
observed “trade winds”: surface-level, equatorward movement of air in the
tropics. In 1735, George Hadley modified this model to take into account the
rotation of the earth. For the atmosphere to rotate along with the earth, its
speed will have to be faster at the equator than at higher latitudes. For this
reason, air moving from the tropics to midlatitudes high above the surface in
the Northern Hemisphere will have a relative velocity to the east; on its return
to the tropics, the surface-level wind will be directed to the west. Accordingly,
the trade winds are observed to blow toward the southwest in the Northern
Hemisphere. In the nineteenth century, this model was further elaborated by
the American physicist William Ferrel (1817– 91). Ferrel realized that as the
upper-level Hadley flow approaches midlatitudes (moving toward the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere), it will begin to cool and sink, and friction
between the air and the earth’s surface will slow it down. In order to maintain
the earth’s constant rotational velocity, Ferrel assumed a counterbalancing
midlatitude surface-level flow toward the poles, directed toward the east in the
Northern Hemisphere, with an equatorward flow toward the west at higher altitudes (see figure 29). This model remained standard until the early twentieth
century.
Ferrel’s model of the general circulation coincided with his theory of the
origin of cyclones. According to Ferrel, a cyclone was a vertical circulation
driven— like a steam engine— by the heat released when water vapor condenses. Warm air cools as it rises, causing condensation; this releases latent
heat, which causes the air to expand; the expansion creates a surface depression, such that air rushes in below, setting up a circulation. Thus Ferrel viewed
cyclones as closed systems. According to his model of the general circulation,
cyclones and smaller eddies can be viewed as “local disturbances”— that is,
as disorderly motions superimposed on the zonal circulation and responsible
for its “irregularities.”3 An alternative theory of cyclones and of their relationship to the general circulation was proposed by Heinrich Dove in Prussia
(1803– 79). Dove understood cyclones as a confrontation between polar and
tropical air currents, a notion that bears only a superficial resemblance to the
theory of the polar front associated with Scandinavian meteorologists of the
early twentieth century. What Ferrel, Dove, and nearly all their contemporaries
had in common was their failure to specify the interactions between regional

Planetary Disturbances

207

F i g u r e 2 9 . Diagram of the general circulation of the atmosphere, by William Ferrel, 1859.

and planetary phenomena. Since Ferrel believed that the energy of cyclones
was generated by the latent heat of condensation, planetary-scale currents
were irrelevant to their formation. Dove assumed, on the contrary, that the
energy of cyclones derived directly from global, equatorial currents; and for
that reason he took no interest in the mechanism of energy transfer between
the zonal flow and eddies. In short, nineteenth-century models of the general
circulation treated phenomena of the dimensions of a cyclone (that is, on the
order of one hundred to one thousand kilometers in diameter, lasting a few
days) as incidental deviations from the hemispheric circulation. They ignored
the exchange of energy between atmospheric phenomena at different scales.
By the 1870s Julius Hann had rejected both Ferrel’s theory that cyclones
are caused by the latent heat of condensation from rising air and Dove’s view

208

Chapter Eight

that cyclones arise from the confrontation of polar and tropical air currents.
Instead, he argued that cyclones grow from the release of tension between
regional differences of air pressure, which in turn are maintained by the
planetary-scale circulation. Here was a potentially revolutionary view of the
significance of local disorderly motions in the context of the circulation of
the atmosphere from equator to poles and back again.

T h e A t m o s p h e r e ’ s “ S o m ew h at
Tangled Movement”
Most scientists in Hann’s day had little motivation to reconcile their explanation of cyclones with their model of the general circulation of the atmosphere.
In an era of naval expansion and empire-building, storms garnered far more
attention than planetary-scale processes. And since storms continued to be
viewed as mere local disturbances, there was no motivation to incorporate
them into a theory of the atmosphere as a whole.4
This changed with the work of the Scottish meteorologist Alexander Buchan (1829– 1907). In 1869 Buchan published “Mean Pressure and Prevailing
Winds of the Globe,” which suggested that cyclones exemplify a fundamental
relationship between airflow and pressure distribution. Buchan also demonstrated the value of barometric maps for understanding the climates of the
world. Inviting controversy from a German-speaking audience, Hann judged
that Buchan’s contribution was more significant than Dove’s in showing the
way forward toward a genuinely “scientific” climatology.5
Hann’s investigations into the distribution of air pressure and temperature
over central Europe led him to a pathbreaking interpretation of the formation
of cyclonic storms. On the basis of synoptic maps, Hann showed that cyclones
tend to form when a pressure low is surrounded by high-pressure centers on
both sides. The regions of high pressure, he supposed, supply the air needed
to maintain cyclonic motion. Here he assumed that a small difference of pressure, acting over a long distance, could be the cause of a powerful rotation. He
showed this to be plausible by means of admittedly crude calculations, which
treated the air as a rotating disk and estimated its kinetic energy accordingly.
Hann continued to refine this argument, and in the 1890s he was able to draw
on new data from the first generation of high-altitude observatories, an innovation that he had tirelessly promoted. Hann’s conclusion, in a nutshell, was
that the convective theory of storms confused cause and effect.6 It treated the
initial temperature difference between rising and sinking air as the cause of
the motion, as in a steam engine. Hann insisted that this contrast was instead

Planetary Disturbances

209

an effect of the motion. He pointed out that such a closed circulation would
quickly peter out without the addition of heat. Against the thermal theory,
Hann argued that storms were not “exceptions” to the general circulation;
they were small-scale effects of the same forces that drove the atmosphere on
the largest scale. Though aperiodic when analyzed individually, regularities
appeared when they were considered in aggregate: when plotted as a monthly
average, the relationship between pressure gradient and wind could be seen to
follow the empirical relationship known as Buys Ballot’s law. As open systems,
cyclones could be understood to feed off low-pressure air masses over the
ocean. From this perspective, it was easy to see why the frequency of cyclones
at midlatitudes increased in winter, when the temperature contrast between
equator and poles was at its starkest. As Hann put it in a visionary passage in
1890, “Cyclones and anticyclones are only partial phenomena in the general
circulation of the atmosphere.”7
In this way, Hann insisted on a transformative shift in the scale of analysis.
In the poetic formulation of the Harvard geomorphologist William Morris Davis, Hann had shown cyclones to be “driven eddies in the somewhat tangled
movement of the general circumpolar winds.”8 From the dimensions of the
eddy itself, Hann had expanded outward to take in the surrounding pressure
field and the circulation of the atmosphere at large. Cyclones and anticyclones
were not closed systems unto themselves, but components of the general atmospheric circulation. Indeed, according to Supan, the victory of Hann’s point
of view in the storm controversy was the result of this shift in scale. Previously, Supan observed, storms had been perceived as “unperiodic and local
phenomena”— that is, they had appeared irrelevant to what Dove described
as the planetary-scale contest between polar and tropical currents. Hann’s
achievement was to reconcile an account of the formation of storms with the
emerging understanding of the relationship between pressure distribution and
winds. “In a word, what appeared to be an exception became the rule: the
phenomenon of general and periodic atmospheric disturbances to equilibrium
in our latitudes are composed of a series of small-scale phenomena, to which
had previously been attributed a local and unperiodic character.”9 Hann had
revealed the significance of what had previously appeared a mere “detail,” a
“disturbance,” by viewing it as a part within a greater whole.
Hann’s colleagues termed this new theory of cyclogenesis “dynamic,” by
which they meant that it explained cyclones with reference to forces generated
by the rotation of the earth. Two decades later, the Austrian meteorologist
Wilhelm Trabert would lament that the term “dynamic” had become so widely
applied to theories of the atmosphere that it hardly carried any specificity.10

210 Chapter Eight

This is a charge that we will return to at the end of this chapter, when we
consider how twentieth-century scientists recounted the origins of “dynamic
climatology.”

Local Disturbances
If climate is defined as average weather, then the variability of weather in time
should lie beyond the scope of climatology. But this is not how Hann and his
colleagues defined climate, as we have seen. Variability was essential to their
concept of climate— as is the case today, in the era of rapid anthropocentric
warming. Indeed, as early as 1872, Hann identified the irregularity of the climate of the midlatitudes as a feature worthy of study. “The climate of the temperate and polar zones are thus governed by the alternation between opposing
wind directions, and thus far no one has been able to discover a rule for this
alternation. The climate [Witterung] of the tropical zone bears the character of
permanence, the climate of the extratropical zone that of utter irregularity and
variability [Regellosigkeit und Veränderlichkeit].”11 Hann was disputing Dove’s
axiom that the atmosphere circulates in two continuous currents. As he and
his colleagues pointed out, this assumption was contradicted by every sudden
gust of wind. That is, we have direct experience of the unsteady character of
winds (“Böigkeit,” “Unstetigkeit”). It is visible, for instance, in the swaying of
a tall field of grass or the quivering of a tree’s branches and leaves.12
By 1891, on the basis of data from the new high-altitude station on the Sonnblick, Hann had reached the conclusion that irregularity was a fundamental
feature of the general circulation:
The stationary state of the atmospheric circulation, in the manner dictated by
the theory [i.e., the theory associated with Dove, assuming a direct circulation
between equator and pole] never obtains in reality. . . . The large temperature
differentials and their temporal displacement near the earth’s surface in higher
latitudes of the wintry hemisphere, the resulting spatial retardations and accelerations of the upper currents, the variable resistance, etc. constitute a continuously changing source of disturbances. In the rapidly rotating upper-level
currents, these must give rise to eddies, which then also set the lower layers of
air in motion. . . . How can one suppose that the atmospheric circulation proceeds entirely without local disturbances, given the many instigating factors
that arise from the temporally and spatially changing temperature gradients
and the different coefficients of resistance.13

P l a t e 1 . Kremsmunster and its surroundings, with the astronomical tower at the center,
painted by Adalbert Stifter, ca. 1823– 25.

P l a t e 2 . Venedigergruppe (Venediger group), Eastern Alps, painting by Friedrich Simony,
1862. The subject of this painting is a section of the Hohe Tauern reaching over ten thousand
feet and which Simony described as displaying “unusual symmetry.” The accompanying text
draws the reader’s eyes to the geological structure of the mountains in the background. But one
should also note the foreground details, particularly the pilgrim gazing up at the devotional
image on the pine tree. Simony’s vantage point for this scene, the village of Neukirchen, had
long been a pilgrimage destination.

P l a t e 3 . “Distribution of Heat in July,” by Josef Chavanne. In Physikalisch-statistischer
Handatlas von Österreich-Ungarn.

P l a t e 4 . Vegetation of the puszta, the Hungarian steppe, painted by Anton Kerner, ca.
1855– 60.

P l a t e 5 . “Floral Map of Austria-Hungary,” by Anton Kerner von Marilaun, 1888. The map
portrays the Habsburg territory as the intersection of four distinct flora: Alpine (red), Baltic
(green), Pontic ( yellow), and Mediterranean (pink).

Planetary Disturbances

211

It would be another thirty years before scientists would be able to substantiate
Hann’s hypothesis on the basis of fundamental physics. Why then did Hann
find this picture of energy flow in the atmosphere so compelling?
Hann’s discussion of “atmospheric disturbances” in his 1901 Lehrbuch
der Meteorologie suggests an answer. Climate, he observed, is an averaged
distillation of experience, while weather is a momentary “total impression”
(Totaleindruck) of the “interactions” (Zusammenspiel) of all atmospheric elements at once. We cannot rightly speak of the weather of a week, a month,
a year— indeed, of any period longer than a day. Even the term Witterung
(atmospheric conditions) “itself designates an abstraction; weather is a real
condition [reeler Zustand], an individual event [Akt] singled out from the
ever-changing series of atmospheric phenomena.” As soon as we begin the
process of averaging the readings of our instruments, we have moved away
from the representation of weather, toward climate— that is, toward a picture of the average atmospheric conditions at a given location. In this sense,
“weather” can give a misleading impression of “climate.” What we encounter
as weather is a disturbance of the stationary state of the atmosphere. It is for
this reason, Hann suggests, that it took so long to elucidate that stationary
state. “The atmospheric circulation actually takes place only in the form of
disturbances, which unfold in such a way that their average effect is responsible for the transport of air that corresponds to the schematic image of the
general atmospheric movements of the higher latitudes. Here, for that reason,
success has come so late and only partially in the discovery of the hidden law
in the fast-changing phenomena.”14 Hann’s point was that this picture of the
atmospheric circulation is but one local perspective, that of the inhabitant of
the midlatitudes. For there is another region of the earth where climate looks
much the same as “weather.” In the tropics, one has a fair chance of experiencing “average” conditions directly at any given moment, because the range
of variation is so narrow.15 In this passage, Hann effected a double reversal of
scale. First, he revealed the provincialism of the purportedly global perspective of the European scientist. Second, he suggested that what appear to be
insignificant details within that global perspective might in fact be vital to the
whole.16
This process of scaling had led Hann to the insight that disorderly motions
were essential to the transport of energy between equator and poles. And yet
he had no way to quantify and test this hypothesis. Without a measure of
the energies involved, he could not accurately judge the significance of atmospheric “irregularities.”

212

Chapter Eight

Measuring Turbulence
How well the best of our flying birds know to adapt themselves to all the small variations
of air currents, by the positioning of their wings and tail!17
Wilhelm Schmidt

Interest in the irregular motions of liquids and gases exploded during the First
World War, due to the push to design more efficient aircraft and submarines.
But a basic understanding of turbulent motions in the atmosphere had already
emerged in the last two decades of the nineteenth century, as Olivier Darrigol
explains in his elegant history of fluid dynamics. Helmholtz took up the study
of atmospheric turbulence in the 1880s. While hiking in the Swiss Alps, he had
seen a thin layer of clouds in the sky in the form of strips of whirling eddies.
He surmised that these disorderly motions were the result of the confrontation
of two layers of air of different densities. He could see how larger eddies spun
off into ever-smaller whirls, forming what would today be called a fractal pattern. From this observation, he realized that atmospheric turbulence could be
responsible for damping the force of winds in the upper atmosphere. Indeed,
without this resistance, the earth’s rotation would accelerate winds to unimaginable speeds.18 The English physicist Osborne Reynolds would soon name
this pseudo-frictional effect of turbulence “eddy viscosity.” In 1922, the meteorologist Lewis Fry Richardson captured this phenomenon in a twist on a verse
by Jonathan Swift: “Big whirls have little whirls that feed on their velocity, and
little whirls have lesser whirls and so on to viscosity— in the molecular sense.”
The pressing question was how to describe this phenomenon mathematically.
An empirical answer to this question would depend on identifying turbulent processes like those occurring in the atmosphere, yet readily measurable. In other words, what are the conditions of physical similarity between
planetary-scale phenomena and devices that can be manipulated in a laboratory? A clue lay in the work of Osborne Reynolds in England. Reynolds used
long, narrow troughs of water to study the dynamics of flowing liquids. He
made turbulent motion visible by injecting a thin stream of colored dye into
water flowing at an adjustable speed. In the 1880s, Reynolds learned from his
experiments how to predict when a stream of fluid would shift from orderly
to disorderly motion; that is, he developed a criterion for the transition from
laminar to turbulent flow.
In doing so, Reynolds introduced a powerful new approach to scaling.
He argued that it was a logical error to suppose that the character of fluid
flow through a pipe depends “in any way” on the “absolute size or absolute

Planetary Disturbances

213

velocity” of the flow in question.19 It should therefore be possible to study
large-scale turbulence via small-scale models, provided that one holds a certain
ratio constant. That ratio has come to be called the Reynolds number, and it
is proportional to the product of velocity, density, and the radius of the pipe,
divided by viscosity. In principle, flows through channels of the same shapes
and proportions but different sizes will display the same degree of turbulence
if they share the same Reynolds number. The Reynolds number thus indicates what remains invariant across scales, and it is therefore a powerful tool
of scaling. Reynolds himself was keen to answer a version of the question that
already preoccupied Hann: namely, to measure the quantity of energy transferred between larger- and smaller-scale motions— in Reynolds’s terms, “the
vis viva consumed by internal friction” and “converted into heat.”20
There remained a problem with applying this approach to meteorology.
The flow of a fluid through a relatively narrow trough or pipe depends on the
height and width of the walls. How would this compare to the flow of air in
an unbounded space like the atmosphere? Measuring phenomena as complex
and fleeting as the disorderly motions of the free atmosphere demanded new
tools and practices of scaling.

E x p e r i m e n ta l C l i m a t e s
In introductory classes today on atmospheric physics, students might have the
good fortune to encounter the “dishpan” demonstration. Fill a cylindrical vat
with water and place a block of colored ice at the center to simulate one of the
poles. Now set the vat on a rapidly rotating turntable and watch as the ice melts
and a wave pattern appears. Look closely and you will see the hemispheric circulation of air between equator and pole. You might even see spiraling whirls
start to form: the genesis of cyclones.
What Peter Galison calls “mimetic” models held an appeal to scientists in
the early twentieth century that is hard to recapture in our own digital age.21 By
translating atmospheric or geological processes into the workings of humanbuilt devices, models made it possible to study impossibly large, distant, or exceedingly gradual processes. Models allowed scientists to “observe” processes
at work high in the atmosphere or deep inside the earth. For scientists who
studied processes too complicated to be described by linear differential equations, models offered a necessary simplification. They also gave earth scientists
a rare opportunity to conduct “experiments,” manipulating the parameters of
their model and the forces acting on it as they could never do for a planet. They
could test hypotheses about the forces responsible for phenomena like cyclones,

214

Chapter Eight

tornadoes, or the convolutions of geological strata. Among the atmospheric
conditions that could be mimicked in the lab were small-scale turbulence,
baroclinic instability (i.e., the movements induced by horizontal temperature
gradients), the Hadley circulation, and Rossby waves. For many scientists,
working with models also had an aesthetic appeal. As they found themselves
spending more and more time crunching data from station networks, models supplied the real-time, multisensory, full-bodied knowledge they missed.
Yet model-building was not to every geoscientist’s taste. As Naomi Oreskes
has shown, there is a tradition of skepticism with respect to models in geology
dating back to the eighteenth century. Some scientists refused to accept evidence from models that contradicted their theories. Others granted models
merely heuristic value; that is, models could demonstrate the plausibility of
proposed causes, but could not prove that those causes operated in nature.22
Despite the enduring and sometimes acrid character of these debates, scientists gave little attention to the criteria that might define a model’s validity as
an analogue for planetary processes.
So it was that when Wilhelm Schmidt (1883– 1936) took up atmospheric
model-building as part of his dissertation research in 1910, he had the sense
that “pure experiments” were “very rarely made in meteorology.” By “pure,”
he meant those that have a goal other than “procuring observations.”23 In other
words, a true experiment is one that tests a causal hypothesis. From a historical
perspective, he was right. James Thompson had described how one might
construct a model of the general circulation in the 1860s, but had gone no
further. In the 1850s, a Berlin physician and amateur meteorologist named
Friedrich Vettin had built a series of model tornadoes. However, Vettin’s work
was little known among meteorologists, allegedly because Heinrich Dove had
intimidated him into silence.24 Schmidt believed that meteorology had much
to gain from honing an experimental method, precisely because atmospheric
phenomena were so complicated and depended on so many different factors.
As a student of Franz Serafin Exner and Ludwig Boltzmann, Schmidt had
been trained to consider nature’s fluctuations as phenomena in their own right
and to work to describe them mathematically.25
The first hypothesis that Schmidt hoped to test was that a squall begins
when a mass of colder air collides with a mass of warmer air. Despite Margules’s efforts, Schmidt judged that here “mathematics fails, or at best is able
to give only distant approximations.” The success of the experiment would
depend, first, on a precise formulation of the hypothesis, and, second, on a
set-up that simplified the conditions to be found in nature, yet without departing too far from them. “Thus one must ascribe demonstrative force to every

Planetary Disturbances

215

F i g u r e 3 0 . Propagation (from left to right) of the “head” of Wilhelm Schmidt’s experimental storm (with the difference between warmer and colder fluid ranging from 0.5°, a, to 35°, f).

investigable and testable analogy, if the conclusions derived from it hold up
against the scale of nature.”26
The apparatus for Schmidt’s experiment was a trough measuring 181 by
31 by 4 centimeters, capped with glass plates on each end lengthwise. Forty
centimeters from one end was a divider, set at an angle. The longer end of the
trough was filled with fluid, while a denser fluid was added to the shorter end,
not quite up to the top of the divider. These fluids of different densities were
meant to simulate air at different temperatures. (For a mesoscale system like a
squall, it was not unreasonable to omit the force of the earth’s rotation.) When
the divider was removed and the fluids mixed, a characteristic eddy form appeared, which Schmidt described as a “raised head” (see figure 30).27 Here
was a way to test Margules’s theory that cold air intrudes on warmer air in a
wedge-shaped mass. In order to investigate this miniature squall more closely,
Schmidt suspended sawdust in both fluids, illuminated it with sunlight, and
photographed the mixing process. The image made the streamlines visible,
clearly showing the rotatory motion induced by the bolt of cold air. The velocity

216

Chapter Eight

of flow at each point was proportional to the length of the mark made by the
moving sawdust in the photographic image, illustrating the relative wind speed
on each side of the squall. What’s more, Schmidt could adjust the temperature (density) difference between the “warm air” and “cold air” and thereby
modify features of the squall, such as its velocity of propagation. That is, he
could adjust his model to produce a weaker or stronger cyclone (a “head”
with a smaller or greater height-to-width ratio) depending on the temperature
difference. Schmidt took this process of scaling even further by asking how
this rearing head would appear from the perspective of a terrestrial observer.
First, the observer would see the cloud bank approaching from afar, followed
by the wall of rain. Then the wind would pick up and the temperature would
drop; if it were summer, this might be followed by thunder and lightning. But
quite soon the rain would cease, the sky would clear, and the wind would calm
to a cool, steady breeze. Schmidt concluded that his model mimicked actual
squalls both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Schmidt next designed two modifications of this experiment to imitate conditions on the ground. First, he added a wedge to the bottom of the trough to
serve as a hill. When a puff of smoke was sent through the trough, mimicking the
influx of cold air, it again formed a “head.” In this case, however, the “head” rose
higher as it propagated than it had with a flat surface, and its size diminished
as it moved uphill. When the smoke was instead forced downhill, the height of
the head fell as it propagated, but the speed of propagation increased. Schmidt
interpreted these results as confirmation of Trabert’s empirical observation that
“every landscape favors the formation of storms in a given direction and inhibits
it in the opposite direction,” depending on the angle of the ground’s slope.
In a second modification, Schmidt observed the effect of an influx of cold
air when the initial conditions involved a surface inversion: colder air below,
warmer air above.28 One half of the trough was now filled a few centimeters
high with a dense, lightly colored glycerin solution, then filled nearly to the top
with water. Into the other half of the trough, separated by a divider, Schmidt
added a darkly colored solution of a density in between those of the other
two liquids. In this case, the head was smaller and flatter than in the previous experiments, and one could see the formation of a middle layer. These
results bore comparison to Margules’s empirical description of the Auflecken
or “lapping up” of a surface inversion. Schmidt reasoned that the arrival of a
cold air mass at a higher altitude would create a stronger horizontal pressure
gradient on high that would “squeeze out” the cold surface air. The observer
on the ground would experience a gradual warming, but with almost no wind.
In conclusion, to those who might say that his models oversimplified reality,

Planetary Disturbances

217

Schmidt countered: “The allegation that nature is in every case much more
complicated is no more true of experiment than of every thought, every abstraction. Cognition is always a path from the simple to the complex.”29

The Coming of War
The Great War brought a new urgency to questions of aerodynamics and
weather, as a result of the introduction of two new weapons: fighter planes and
chemical gas. In Austria, civilian meteorology was uniquely well positioned to
respond to the military’s needs. Meteorology had a dedicated professorship
at each university and was a required subject for candidates for a teaching
certificate in physics, mathematics, and geography.30 In 1915 Felix Exner was
promoted to director of the ZAMG and put in charge of the weather service of
the Austro-Hungarian forces, which took up residence in the institute’s villa
on the Hohe Warte. Several of the younger staff members were called to the
front, but Wilhelm Schmidt and Albert Defant remained behind, the former in
his capacity as secretary of the ZAMG, the latter as an adjunct in the weather
service.31 Research unrelated to warfare ground virtually to a halt.
On the home front, censorship was strict, and food was in short supply.
With the death of Franz Josef in November 1916, after seventy years on the
throne, the dynasty’s legitimacy was in jeopardy. Nationalists began to clamor
for the federalization of the empire, and in October 1918, the new emperor,
Charles I, acquiesced. When peace was finally declared, approximately 1.2
million Austro-Hungarian soldiers had died, while nearly 2 million had been
interned as prisoners of war, many of whom were struggling to make their way
home in the midst of Russia’s civil war.32
The researchers of the ZAMG believed their science had proved its practical value in wartime. They expected it to be suitably supported by the postwar
state. But war’s end brought an economic crisis to the new Republic of Austria.
Exner and his coworkers were struggling to find enough food to eat and coal to
warm their homes. Hardest hit was Max Margules. On the rare occasion when
an acquaintance laid eyes on him, his physical deterioration was worrying.
Food had been hard to come by during the war, and the postwar inflation had
left the retired meteorologist with little to spend. Still, Margules refused to
accept assistance. In 1919, the Austrian Meteorological Society awarded him
its Hann Medal. Margules declined the check that came with it, insisting that
the money could be put to better use elsewhere.
In these economic conditions, government funding for basic research
was not to be had. What’s more, with the breakup of the empire in 1918, the

218 Chapter Eight

scientists of the ZAMG could no longer count on access to observations from
beyond Austria’s new borders. At that point, the virtue of working with scale
models became a necessity.
It was only then that Schmidt realized that a rival group of researchers had
been developing similar tools of scaling. In 1907, the University of Göttingen
established an institute for aerodynamic modeling and testing under the direction of Ludwig Prandtl, and its first wind tunnel began operation the following
year. Prandtl was an engineer by training, educated at Munich’s Polytechnic
University. Based on his experimental studies, he had already begun to work
out a mathematical description of the flow of air close to the edges of objects
and the conditions under which vortices would form.33 However, Prandtl did
not consider the application of his results to meteorology until the early 1920s.
In 1926, when Wilhelm Schmidt first contacted Ludwig Prandtl about their
shared interest in atmospheric modeling, he complained of the “meager means
available to us in Austria.” Prandtl was by then director of the new Kaiser
Wilhelm Institute for Fluid Dynamics (Strömungsforschung) in Göttingen.
Schmidt had recently applied to the Notgemeinschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft (Emergency Association for German Science) to support a “larger
program for more precise studies of turbulence in the free atmosphere.”34 Here
was a mode of fundamental atmospheric research that seemed custom made
for the reduced conditions of the postwar ZAMG.35 And yet, how much more
could be accomplished with the sophisticated apparatus of Prandtl’s laboratory! Prandtl’s studies of atmospheric turbulence were likely fueled in part by
the hang-gliding craze that took postwar Germany by storm. But his bigger
bait was the new work of Vilhelm Bjerknes on the dynamics of cyclones. Like
Schmidt and Exner, Prandtl was skeptical of Bjerknes’s description of cyclones as waves in a surface of discontinuity between polar and tropical air. If
such a surface were stable enough to support waves, what would cause these
waves to develop into cyclones? And if the surface were unstable, how could
it be considered a permanent feature of the atmosphere? Bjerknes dreamed of
reducing atmospheric motions to analytic equations, but this approach could
not be applied to a nonlinear process like eddy formation, as Exner pointed
out. He and Schmidt turned to experiment “out of the need to make progress
by other means.”36

Tempest in a Teapot
Indeed, it was Exner who designed the classic “rotating dishpan” model of
the general circulation. He first discussed it in print in 1923, at the height of

Planetary Disturbances

219

F i g u r e 3 1 . Felix Exner’s rotating-dishpan model of the general circulation, photographed
from above, 1923. Tongues of cold water radiate out from the ice at the center and form vortices
akin to cyclones.

Austria’s inflationary crisis. Exner filled a cylindrical vat with water, positioned
a block of ice at the center, set it rotating, and applied heat to the rim to produce a starker temperature gradient between equator and pole. Photographs
captured the eddying forms that Exner likened to cyclones (see figure 31).
Another project accomplished on the shoestring budget of the postwar ZAMG
was Exner’s “artificial tornado.” This was a rotating vat containing nothing but
air, warmed along the rim. As the air above the rim warms and rises, it flows
toward the center, and a tall column of eddying air forms, which Exner used
smoke to visualize. Crucially, Exner could intervene in this process at will. By
blowing through a pipe aimed at the center and bottom of the vat, he could
trigger the formation of a new eddy.
By manipulating these whirls up close, Exner came to feel he had penetrated to the heart of cyclogenesis. “If one observes this phenomenon frequently, a process becomes clear— as simple as it may be, it is the essential one
in the formation not only of these vortices, but in cyclones in general.”37 This
essential feature was the barrier that the tongue of cold air posed as it flowed
outward into the more rapidly rotating air closer to the rim. The result, Exner

220

Chapter Eight

inferred, was the formation of a center of low pressure behind the cold air,
which gave the air a rotational motion. What’s more, Exner found that if he
eliminated the temperature gradient between the center and rim of the rotating
vat, the eddies vanished.
On the basis of these experiments, Exner objected to Bjerknes’s characterization of cyclones as waves in a stable circumpolar surface of discontinuity
between polar and equatorial air. This seemed to Exner irreconcilable with the
observation, originally due to Hann, that cyclones were essential components
of the general circulation of the atmosphere. How could a wave take part in
a closed circulation? Instead, cyclones represented the “unfurling [Aufrollen]” of an unstable surface.38 At the same time, Exner used these experiments
to refute Wegener’s recent assertion that cyclone formation was driven by a
contrast between air masses in two different states of motion.39 The rotating
dishpan demonstrated that a temperature difference was necessary to instigate a rotational motion. As the model demonstrated, rotation began when
the warm westerly wind was presented with a barrier of cold air. The questions Exner raised about Bjerknes’s model would not be answered until the
late 1930s, when Carl-Gustaf Rossby elucidated the conditions under which
stable planetary-scale waves could form at the boundary between polar and
tropical air.40

L a b o r ato ry L a n d s ca p e s
Schmidt and Exner found inspiration for their laboratory models in living
landscapes. In lakes, riverbeds, and sand dunes, they saw natural analogues
to the processes unfolding in the atmosphere. These landscape features recorded, less ephemerally than clouds, the characteristic forms of motion that
arise when contrasting layers of air, water, or earth flow past one another. For
instance, Exner’s 1921 study of dunes and riverbeds opened by conceptualizing the riverbed as a trace, a record of the ways in which water and sediment
had shaped each other as one flowed over the other. Likewise, dunes could be
thought of as the trace of interacting flows of air and earth.41 Landscapes were
semipermanent registers of fluid dynamics.
As a professor of climatology at Vienna’s Agricultural University, Schmidt’s
research concerned the interactions of soil, water, and air. Back in the laboratory at the ZAMG, Schmidt began to study the effects of the earth’s rotation
on the course of rivers and their beds. It had long been assumed that riverbeds,
like air currents, had a natural tendency to curve due to the rotation of the earth
(Baer’s law). This would explain the rightward bends of many rivers in the

Planetary Disturbances

221

Northern Hemisphere. It was tempting to compare this effect to Buys Ballot’s
law for atmospheric rotation, but Schmidt suspected that this analogy was misleading. There were essential differences, he argued, between the conditions
of flow for water in a river and for air in the free atmosphere.
In pursuing this question, Schmidt was evaluating the analogy between
river formation and atmospheric dynamics. What were the conditions of similarity? He turned the question into an exercise in dimensional analysis. The
gradient force is much stronger in the case of water falling under the force of
gravity, he noted, than when air is driven by a difference in pressure. However, the frictional force is also far greater in the river’s case, where the flow
is bounded on three sides, than in the free atmosphere. Taking friction into
account, Schmidt estimated that the deflecting force of the earth’s rotation
was 390 times greater when acting on the atmosphere than when acting on
a river. On these grounds, he doubted that a river’s curves were an effect of
the Coriolis force. To test this reasoning, Schmidt designed a motor-powered
rotating turntable. Atop this turntable he placed a flat-bottomed vat filled with
damp sand, the surface of which sloped in one direction. He then poured
water slowly over the sand in one location and observed its course. On this
basis, Schmidt claimed that the combined effect of rotation and erosion
was a sharp leftward bend of the flowing water— “in precisely the opposite
direction as one has typically assumed and even in some cases believed to
observe.”42
Exner, however, was not convinced. He devised his own variation on this
experiment, using a mixture of sand and silt. He gave the material a gentler
slope than Schmidt had, dug a straight canal before adding the water, and
added a drain at the opposite end. In this way, Exner obtained results that
agreed better with observations of natural rivers. What he found was that the
rotational force pressed the flowing water toward the right side of the canal,
so that the surface of the water sloped to the right, and the fastest-moving part
of the stream was not the middle but the right-hand side. This rise in velocity
increased erosion on the right side of the bed, which created a slight bend in
the river toward the right. At a certain point in the water’s course, however, the
gravitational potential of the slope outweighed the centrifugal force, and the
water’s course then bent to the left, downhill. Thus the cumulative effect was
a riverbed that displayed curves to the right followed by sharp leftward bends
when the flow was heavy. This explained both Schmidt’s observations and
the common wisdom contained in Baer’s law.43 In fact, Exner’s observations
also squared with the terse theoretical analysis of river meandering that Albert
Einstein had published the previous year, apparently unbeknownst to Exner.44

222

Chapter Eight

Today, geophysicists continue to debate the causes of meandering in rivers, but
tend to emphasize local effects of turbulence and gravity over the influence of
the earth’s rotation.45
Like his observations of dunes and meanders in nature, these experiments
brought home to Exner the sheer complexity of the phenomena involved. He
remarked on the sensitivity of the results to conditions such as the amount of
water flowing and the composition of the soil. This was not a reason to give
up— on the contrary, complexity implied the limits of mathematical analysis
and the indispensability of models.
What Exner sought was a more explicit condition of similarity between
small scale and large. In order to compare lab results to observations of the
Danube, for instance, one had to consider the rotational velocity of the turntable in comparison to that of the earth at the latitude of Vienna. A more realistic model would also require a material other than sand or silt, one that was
only as porous as the natural riverbed. Finally, Exner turned to dimensional
analysis to compare the effect of erosion in the laboratory to that observed in
nature. Making simple assumptions about the mathematical form of the forces
at work, he derived an equation for the average velocity of flow that applied
equally to laboratory models and full-scale rivers. Here was a plausible condition of similarity.46
Schmidt had plans to apply this rotating turntable to his prewar experiments on the inflow of cold air, but he was strapped for resources. By 1926,
Prandtl, by contrast, had built an entire rotating room, a “carousel,” as his
daughters fondly called it.47 It was cylindrical in shape and three meters wide
by two meters high.48 “It seems to me,” Prandtl wrote Schmidt, “that your
experiments and mine are not in competition with each other. But I would welcome establishing an ongoing contact between us, such that each of us would
inform the other of any experiments in this field, in order to avoid any unnecessary duplication of labor.” In one case, Prandtl was kind enough to offer the
services of his laboratory for the precise determination of the coefficient of resistance of a pockmarked copper sphere that Schmidt intended to use to study
the role of turbulence in generating air resistance. Prandtl, for his part, was unaware until then that related research was under way in Vienna. He had known
nothing of Exner’s earlier experiments with the rotating dishpan until Schmidt
referred to them in a subsequent letter.49 Nonetheless, the Göttingen engineer
shared some of the same motivations as Vienna’s geophysicists. “One keeps
hearing,” Schmidt complained to Prandtl, “that the storm fronts originate in
the collapse of such unstable layers. Purely topologically, that is not possible.”
Prandtl had expressed this same doubt at the 1922 meeting of the German

Planetary Disturbances

223

Physical Society.50 More fundamentally, Prandtl shared the hunch of Schmidt,
Exner, and Defant that atmospheric physics had thus far neglected the fundamental role of turbulence. Schmidt suspected that the instability of the
polar front was a turbulent effect of the earth’s rotation, and this was among the
hypotheses that his rotating table was meant to test. “You can see where this
is leading: to the formation of systems of eddies of given dimensions, similar
to those we see on earth.”51
The question remained: how could researchers model large-scale turbulence in the free atmosphere at the far smaller dimensions of the laboratory?
In their private exchanges, Schmidt and Prandtl confessed their uncertainty
about the epistemic status of their models. Schmidt wrote of the need for further experiments to model large-scale circulation, but expressed his concern
that it was not possible to reach similar levels of turbulence in the laboratory.
“The one great difficulty lies indeed in that one must actually keep the turbulence proportionately low. Not enough attention is paid to this when one
is dealing with more tangled [maschere] flows.”52 Prandtl agreed: “With these
experiments on the imitation of the large-scale circulation, the question of
scale naturally concerns me as well. But I will be content for the time being
if only a qualitative analogy comes out of it.” Schmidt, by contrast, did not
abandon the hope of hitting on criteria that would ensure a quantitative as
well as qualitative similarity between laboratory model and free atmosphere.
In a letter to Prandtl in April 1932, Schmidt wondered “if one might be able
to find a simple criterion for turbulent versus laminar flow for the free atmosphere as you have managed to find in your experiments. It’s a matter namely
of deciding the question I’ve already mentioned: whether the free atmosphere
exhibits processes that the meteorologist would still treat as laminar, while
the physicist would consider them turbulent, or even perhaps the reverse.”
Schmidt was questioning the very definition of turbulence in the free atmosphere. The laboratory physicist’s usual criteria did not necessarily apply, and
it was possible that the Reynolds number was “something entirely different”
for atmospheric flows. Back in 1917, Schmidt had raised the possibility that
“a new form of movement” would be discovered in the atmosphere, one that
was related to but not identical with “turbulence” as it was known from laboratory studies.53 Schmidt and Prandtl agreed that unusually strong forces and
a high degree of precision would be necessary in order to draw quantitative
conclusions about the free atmosphere from laboratory experiments. Indeed,
Prandtl calculated that any laboratory model would need to achieve ten to fifty
times the force of gravity to generate a density profile comparable to that of
the earth’s atmosphere.54

224

Chapter Eight

This quest to construct laboratory models of atmospheric dynamics found
little appreciation outside of central Europe in the 1920s. At that time, the
growth of military and commercial aviation was driving demand for reliable
weather predictions. Most meteorologists were intent on applying the new
concepts of fronts and air masses to more or less practical schemes of forecasting. Lewis Fry Richardson famously imagined a forecasting “factory” with
sixty-four thousand workers. Tellingly, he included in this proposal a disparaging caricature of “an enthusiast” in the basement “observing eddies in the
liquid lining of a huge spinning bowl.”55 And yet the Austrians’ persistent
recourse to mimetic experimentation was not a mere eccentricity. It was, in
part, a critique of the rush to reduce the complexity of atmospheric processes
to solvable equations.
Ironically, mimetic models of the atmosphere only began to draw the attention of leading international researchers circa 1950— just as the first digital
computers made possible quantitative simulations of atmospheric dynamics,
apparently rendering analog methods obsolete. In 1947, Carl-Gustaf Rossby,
the Swedish-born atmospheric physicist and chair of the new department of
meteorology at the University of Chicago, launched a series of laboratory experiments on large-scale turbulent mixing. After his departure for Stockholm
in 1950, several of his colleagues and students at Chicago continued for several
years to hone these models.56 They were inspired by their rediscovery of Exner’s papers of the 1920s: “Exner’s work with a rotating disk was pointed out
to us by Dr. O. R. Wulf and a decision was made to repeat and extend Exner’s
experiment particularly from the standpoint of making numerical measurements.”57 By the early 1950s, similar experiments were under way at MIT and
Cambridge University, and their results received theoretical attention from
Edward Lorenz, among others.58 Fultz’s group also made a detailed study of
the history of this mode of experimentation. They came to suspect that it
had played a bigger role in the history of meteorological thought than had
ever been acknowledged. This appeared to them an “extremely interesting,
and valuable” topic for “a historian of science.”59 Of course, these were the
very years in which numerical weather prediction was getting off the ground
at Princeton. Mimetic models were quickly overshadowed by the promise of
unprecedented calculating power.
Today, these laboratory models of whirling atmospheres remind us of what
computation alone cannot achieve. Computer climate models have grown so
staggeringly complex that even experts cannot understand their operation
at an intuitive level. One of the world leaders in climate science today, Isaac
Held, has therefore called for the construction of a hierarchy of models, from

Planetary Disturbances

225

complex to simple, much as biologists study simpler organisms in order to
understand more complex ones. In that light, mimetic models may have a
new role to play. As Held suggests, “Laboratory simulations of rotating and/
or convecting fluids remain valuable and underutilized.”60

Q ua n t i f y i n g “ E xc h a n g e ”
By 1913, Schmidt had begun to envision a generalized mathematical approach
to disorderly motions in the atmosphere.61 He aimed to do for fluid dynamics
what an earlier generation of Austrian physicists had done for thermodynamics. With their contributions to the kinetic theory of gases, Ludwig Boltzmann,
Josef Stefan, and Franz Serafin Exner (Felix’s uncle) had provided a statistical description of the emergence of order out of disorder. Echoing the elder
Exner, with whom he had studied, Schmidt explained in 1916 that “turbulent
motion bears the stamp of the random, the incalculable— this is true, if one
tries to follow the processes down to the smallest detail; not true, if one simply
proceeds on the basis of the laws of its effects.”62 The analogy between the
statistical treatment of thermodynamics and Schmidt’s approach to turbulence
ran deep. The differential equation describing turbulent mass exchange took
the same form as the equation for heat conduction in the kinetic theory of
gases. Turbulence, however, is a much more efficient means of mixing warmer
and colder air than ordinary conduction.
In 1917 Schmidt introduced a mathematical definition of Austausch or “exchange.”63 This concept built on the recognition, due to Helmholtz and Reynolds, that turbulence plays out in the atmosphere at multiple scales at once:
in the motions of molecules, in the synoptic-scale motions we call storms,
and in the planetary-scale circulation of the atmosphere as a whole. There
must, therefore, be a way to measure what is transferred between smaller and
larger eddies by means of this disorderly motion, whether mass or another
property such as momentum, heat, or even impurities suspended in the air.
And it should be possible to do so even without any detailed knowledge of the
paths of flow. Schmidt reasoned further that this measure will depend only on
the eddying motion, not on the composition of the fluids or gases, nor on the
properties being transferred.64 He derived the Austausch coefficient directly
from considerations of the conservation of momentum of a fluid or gas flowing horizontally with no mean vertical component of motion. The coefficient
of “exchange” is then the momentum transferred from an upper layer to a
lower layer in a given cross-sectional area. In terms more familiar today, the
Austausch coefficient is proportional to the product of mixing length, density,

226

Chapter Eight

and local average vertical velocity. Mathematically, Schmidt’s Austausch coefficient is analogous to the coefficients of diffusion, conductivity, and viscosity
in kinetic gas theory, but it depends on the dynamic rather than molecular
properties of the gas. Thus it varies with atmospheric conditions, namely, wind
shear and thermal stability.65 According to Schmidt’s measurements, the Austausch coefficient is 1 kg m−1 sec−1 under calm conditions and in layers of the
atmosphere close to the ground. It averages approximately 90 kg m−1 sec−1 at
the top of the Eiffel Tower, and is as high as 140 kg m−1 sec−1 in the region of
the north Atlantic upper-level trade wind.66
Schmidt’s notion of Austausch filled a conceptual hole in the atmospheric
science of his day. It soon became widely used, and it remained common well
into the 1930s, particularly in agricultural climatology and “microclimatology”
more broadly, as well as in empirical measurements of atmospheric turbulence.67 Schmidt was recognized as one of the pioneers of the study of atmospheric turbulence, along with his Austrian colleague Albert Defant and G. I.
Taylor and Harold Jeffreys in Britain. Schmidt applied the Austausch concept
to a startlingly wide range of phenomena; with one stroke, he synthesized much
of the research on atmospheric (and oceanic) turbulence of the previous half
century. Commentators praised the broad, synthetic scope and fundamental
significance of his contribution. “The new ideas concerning the ‘Austausch,’
introduced to a large extent into meteorology by Wilhelm Schmidt himself,
have shown themselves to have such a wide applicability within almost all
branches of this science, that the knowledge here conferred on the reader must
be regarded as fundamental for the conception of meteorological phenomena
in general.”68 Ludwig Prandtl expressed the “great pleasure” he took in seeing
the “nice and clear results that have already come out of your investigations.”69
Austausch was only gradually displaced as a measure of turbulence in atmospheric physics as Prandtl’s concept of “mixing length” caught on.
The Austausch concept opened up two directions for research at once.
First, when applied to movements of air perpendicular to the ground, it was
of great practical value. Note that vertical motions are the means by which
layers of warmer air higher in the atmosphere mix with cooler layers lower
down. A region of the atmosphere with a lower Austausch coefficient implies a
local climate that is more independent of larger-scale atmospheric conditions.
In this respect, the Austausch coefficient provided “important foundations for
the characterization of the ‘local climate.’”70 For instance, valleys were marked
by a smaller degree of Austausch than mountain peaks and ridges. This explains why valleys experience greater disparities between temperature highs
and lows both diurnally and annually. Likewise, the climate of a forest clearing

Planetary Disturbances

227

(low Austausch) could be considered “independent,” while that of an open
field (high Austausch) was “dependent.” Always fond of phenomenological
interpretations, Schmidt noted that a hunting dog sniffing at the ground knows
intuitively where the Austausch coefficient is lowest. By the same token, plants
growing close to the ground live in a “different climate” than taller plants.
Because evaporation depends on the degree of atmospheric mixing, rates of
evaporation are higher for taller vegetation. Austausch thus tracked climatic
characteristics that were of vital significance to living things.
In 1925 Schmidt published The Exchange of Mass in the Free Atmosphere
and Related Phenomena. He described it as an “attempt” to present “a scientific
field of study still under construction to a wider circle of readers and in a more
easily accessible form.” He addressed the book to a range of applied scientists,
primarily meteorologists, oceanographers, geographers, physicists, botanists,
and agriculturalists. Indeed, one reviewer judged that the book should be “of
interest to all concerned with meteorology, oceanography, climatology, atmospheric electricity, and even botany.”71 True to the “word and image” tradition,
Schmidt de-emphasized equations, instead furnishing numerical examples
and tables of quantitative results. In his conclusion he reported satisfaction at
having been able to present “tangible images” ( greifbaren Bilder) of turbulent
motions in the atmosphere.72
The Austausch framework had many practical applications. It could give
farmers insight into the process of evaporation (as Schmidt had already indicated in his 1916 study), while it offered fisheries an understanding of the
distribution of plankton in the oceans. Austausch coefficients could also be
used to predict the local climatic impact of human activities such as deforestation and urban growth. Such questions had been on Schmidt’s mind for
decades. Back in 1905, he had measured the “impurity” of city air, defined by
the number of dust particles revealed by an Aitken condensation chamber.73
These concerns remained central to his scientific work up until his sudden
death in 1936. At that time, he had just completed a book on climate in “human surroundings,” coauthored with an expert on industrial hygiene (see the
conclusion to this book).
Still, Schmidt’s interest in Austausch was not exhausted by its potential
to serve local, practical needs. The concept was equally applicable to global
investigations. Shifting his attention from vertical to horizontal transfers of
energy, Schmidt was able to study planetary-scale processes with the same
mathematical tool he had developed for the local scale. The Austausch framework makes it possible to quantify turbulent exchange between equator and
poles. In this way, it enabled calculations of the planetary-scale ramifications of

228

Chapter Eight

climatic fluctuations.74 Already in 1917, Schmidt had reasoned that the energy
transferred horizontally via turbulent eddies was a more significant factor in
the maintenance of the general circulation than dissipation via molecular friction. This was the conviction Helmholtz had reached in the 1880s, but now
Schmidt had shown how to give it precise mathematical form. It was, Schmidt
hoped, a step toward understanding “the energy and water budget of the earth
as a whole.”75

T h e G e n e r a l C i rc u l at i o n
In 1921, these threads of research into turbulent cross-scale energy exchanges
were woven together into a vivid new image of the atmosphere. In that year,
Albert Defant published the first theory of climate variability based on atmospheric dynamics.76 Defant brought the full arsenal of Habsburg scaling
techniques— mathematical, experimental, and rhetorical— to bear on what he
termed a “theory of climate fluctuations.” The result was the first account of
the general circulation that attributed a causal role to phenomena on the spatial and temporal scale of daily life— phenomena like ordinary storms, which
previous theorists had overlooked as mere “local disturbances.”
It happens that the British physicist Harold Jeffreys arrived at the same conclusion five years later, but by a very different path. It is helpful to begin by
looking at Jeffreys’s approach, because the contrast with Defant’s is revealing.
Jeffreys reasoned from first principles. He began by deducing the winds to be
expected from a given distribution of temperature in the earth’s atmosphere. He
arrived at equations that predicted winds of the right order of magnitude, but
all blowing from east to west. This result was contradicted by well-known belts
of westerly winds in each hemisphere. What was missing from his calculations,
he reasoned, was friction. But friction alone would not generate westerlies. The
lesson of the exercise was that no solution to this mathematical model was possible in which the pressure distribution was symmetrical and alone determined
the winds. That is, the general circulation must include a small ageostrophic
component. This highly formal argument led to the conclusion that the only
possible pressure distribution that could maintain the general circulation was
one built up of large-scale eddies or cyclones at midlatitudes. From this new
perspective, cyclones could not be said to “represent either an instability of the
general circulation, or oscillations about a steady general circulation.” Rather,
cyclones were the only possible form that the atmospheric circulation could take
at midlatitudes. Throughout this analysis, Jeffreys’s style was formal and terse,
and the force of his conclusion rested on abstract mathematical arguments.77

Planetary Disturbances

229

Defant’s approach was a world apart. A native of South Tyrol, he had
been educated at Innsbruck and Vienna and had been appointed professor
of cosmic physics at Innsbruck in 1919. In tackling the problem of the general
circulation, he drew on a range of scaling practices developed by Habsburg
researchers over the previous half century. In his introduction, he invited the
reader to contemplate “the earth as a whole.” How could a mortal observer
possibly arrive at a visual image of the general circulation of the atmosphere?
What would such a planetary-scale, time-averaged picture of atmospheric motions look like? Echoing Hann’s Textbook of Meteorology, Defant noted that
the question would be easier to answer for an observer residing in the tropics.
Elsewhere, an image of the planetary-scale circulation can only be constructed
on an appropriately long time scale. Defant then engaged in an act of scaling
as bold and imaginative as Adalbert Stifter’s poetic juxtapositions of large and
small. He proposed to consider “the atmospheric currents of the temperate latitudes as a marked phenomenon of turbulence on a grand scale.” To make this
intuitive, Defant appealed to the reader’s everyday experience with turbulence.
He conjured up “a large, wide river” in which the movement of water “is not
flowing, but rolling, whirling, and pulsing.” A reader at the time might have
been reminded of Exner’s and Schmidt’s studies of meanders. Averaging the
flow of water over time would produce an orderly distribution of velocities for
a given cross-section. Yet this distribution “does not exist in actuality, but is
only an abstraction from the disorderly flow of the water.” Just so, the orderly,
time-averaged picture of hemispheric air currents was a fiction. What was the
reality?78
Defant next asked the reader to picture an “ordinary air current.” It was common to feel small eddies or “restlessness” (Unruhe) in such everyday winds.
Who would describe those small turbulent effects as anything but “insignificant disturbances”? And yet recent research by Wegener had suggested that
wind patterns would be entirely different without this small-scale turbulence.79
By the same token, studies of the general circulation had previously ignored
cyclones and anticyclones, dismissing them as mere “disturbances.” Of course,
viewed from a human perspective, cyclones were too big— too extensive and
too long-lived— to seem like random fluctuations. However, as Defant’s calculations showed, the lifetime of cyclones stood in the same spatial and temporal
proportion to the general circulation as did the turbulent motions characteristic of a wind’s “restlessness” to the wind itself. Researchers had failed to
recognize the true character of cyclones for much the same reason that they
had discounted this restlessness— “because it impinges too forcefully on the
course of weather in our latitudes, and because at the dimensions that man has

230 Chapter Eight

introduced as practical, the size of the disturbed region and the duration of the
perturbation are very large.”80 Scientists had attended to the human scale at
the expense of the study of phenomena that either fell short of or exceeded it.
The other key ingredient in Defant’s analysis was Schmidt’s concept of
Austausch. He proposed to characterize the degree of turbulence of the atmosphere at midlatitudes in the Northern Hemisphere by means of the Austausch
coefficient, A, calculated as an annual average at a given location. Defant gave
his own derivation of this quantity for the case of horizontal exchange— that is,
for turbulent flow from south to north. This required estimating the relevant
parameters. He took the characteristic length to be the average diameter of
cyclones and anticyclones, “which are indeed the turbulent elements of our
disorderly motion,” and he used anemometer data to estimate the wind speed
and thus the momentum flux. This led to a value of 107 kg m−1 sec−1 for A in the
region of “central Europe.” He then proceeded to a second calculation of A by
means of a proportionality argument due to Felix Exner. Recall that Exner, in
his study of meanders, had derived conditions under which one could expect
the turbulence of two fluid systems of equal density to be geometrically similar.
Specifically, a faster flow of larger dimensions would need correspondingly
greater viscosity to produce similar motions. This provided a way to solve for
the “virtual” viscosity, or Austausch, of the midlatitude circulation. Given measured values for the size of turbulent eddies in ordinary air currents of a given
velocity, and known values for the diameter of cyclones, this simple scaling
argument likewise led to a horizontal Austausch coefficient at midlatitudes on
the order of 107 kg m−1 sec−1. Defant noted that this was a large value. As we’ve
seen, coefficients of vertical Austausch, even at the top of the Eiffel Tower, were
at least five orders of magnitude smaller. It was so large that one could not deny
the key role that turbulence must play in the transport of heat between equator
and poles. Here was confirmation of a principle that Helmholtz had intuited
long before: namely, what keeps the earth’s winds from accelerating beyond
the fastest gales on record is not friction with the earth’s surface but the eddy
viscosity generated by large-scale turbulence. Defant drew the conclusion that
the general circulation outside of the tropics was “the largest of the random
motions that we have known of until now.”81
As this suggests, Defant rested his claim to knowledge of the general circulation on a very different basis than Jeffreys did. While Jeffreys began with
mathematical proof, Defant opened with a set of vivid verbal images. While
Jeffreys remained at the scale of the earth as a whole, Defant asked readers to
consider dimensions ranging from the microscopic to the synoptic. Defant
demonstrated how turbulence affected the natural world at every scale, from

Planetary Disturbances

231

the motions of gas molecules to eddying winds, from the flow of water in a narrow pipe to a major river. Indeed, the relativity of scale was a methodological
precept for Defant. Echoing the ethos and language of Habsburg naturalists
from J. E. Purkyne, to Eduard Suess, to his own mentor, Julius Hann, Defant
showed how naive humans would be to view the world exclusively at dimensions corresponding to the perceptual capacities of our species.

T h e S ta b i l i t y o f t h e E a r t h ’ s C l i m a t e
From there Defant took up a question that Jeffreys hadn’t even considered.
Namely, what does the essential role of turbulence in the general circulation
imply about climate change? That is, Defant intended to use the Austausch
framework to assess the impact of a local climatic disturbance on the state of
the atmospheric circulation as a whole. Just how stable was the earth’s climate?
This was a question inspired by long-standing debates over the significance
of historical evidence of climatic variations (chapter 9). Despite the common
impression that, in Defant’s words, “the temperature and pressure conditions of the earth represent a stationary state,” recent research had revealed
the existence of both periodic and aperiodic climate fluctuations. These had
been studied in depth by the climatologist Eduard Bruckner, Defant’s colleague in Vienna, whose 1890 Climate Fluctuations since 1700 Defant cited
in his conclusion. Bruckner had identified a thirty-five-year cycle of cold and
warm periods on the basis of historical documents, but he had not been able
to explain its cause. James Croll had attributed such shifts to astronomical
causes— variations in the shape of the earth’s orbit around the sun and in the
tilt of its axis, plus the wobble of its axis known as precession.82 Following
John Tyndall and Svante Arrhenius, on the other hand, Defant posited that
at least some of this variability must be of “terrestrial origin.” He supposed
that that such variations could arise from a local disturbance that precipitated
changes in other regions of the atmosphere. What then did the Austausch
framework imply about the manner in which such a perturbation would propagate through the atmosphere?
Defant took a concrete example. Suppose there exists an oscillation of
temperature in the tropics with an eleven-year period (corresponding to the
observed cycle of solar activity). What effect would this have on the climate
of the rest of the earth? Assuming a constant coefficient of exchange, Defant’s
calculations predicted that the disturbance would spread to higher latitudes
without a significant change in period, but with rapidly decreasing amplitude
and a slight phase delay. The problem with this result was that, according to

232

Chapter Eight

observations, the strongest climate fluctuations occurred at middle and higher
latitudes, not in the tropics. Defant resolved this contradiction by pointing out
that the assumption of a constant coefficient of Austausch, A, was unwarranted.
On the contrary, he suggested, large fluctuations of temperature in the middle
and higher latitudes should correlate with large fluctuations in the coefficient
of exchange. In this way, Defant suggested, by conceptualizing the general
circulation in terms of Austausch and allowing the coefficient A to vary with
time— by treating it as a parameter rather than a constant— it was possible to
arrive at a comprehensive “theory of climate fluctuations.”83
Defant showed that the variability of atmospheric temperature with time
at a given latitude could be written as a function of two terms, one depending
on the variation of A with latitude, and the other depending on the intensity of solar radiation and the radiative properties of the atmosphere (which
Defant defined in terms of a “coefficient of emission,” the value of which he
admitted was highly uncertain). This led him to argue that climate fluctuations
could be attributed most generally to three factors: 1) changes in solar activity,
2) changes in the composition of the atmosphere, and 3) changes in the degree
of dynamic exchange between equatorial and polar regions, as measured by
A. For instance, a rise in solar activity would increase the temperature difference between poles and equator; this would increase A, which in turn would
balance out the temperature gradient. Drawing an analogy to a steam engine’s
governor, Defant concluded that “over the larger time intervals in which exchange [Austausch] occurs, the circulation of the atmosphere behaves like a
regulator.” And yet he went on to admit that things might not be that simple.
There was geological evidence that these fluctuations had been more significant earlier in the earth’s history. Moreover, it had become clear that “the
absorptivity of the atmosphere is subject to modifications as a result of changes
in its composition (for instance, as a result of volcanic eruptions, etc.).” Presumably, the greenhouse effect of industrial carbon dioxide was contained
in Defant’s “etc.” If a change in the composition of the atmosphere were to
raise the “coefficient of emission,” Defant assumed that the result would be a
stronger north-south temperature gradient; this would ramp up the turbulent
exchange, which in turn would even out the distribution of heat. The original
temperature distribution would return, although the atmosphere’s emissivity
would remain elevated, as would the coefficient of exchange. Defant assumed
that atmospheric absorption would eventually return to its lower initial level.
At that point, the heightened atmospheric exchange would carry more heat to
the poles, which in turn would decrease the exchange between equator and
poles; in short, the earth would return to its original state. Again, turbulence

Planetary Disturbances

233

would act as a “regulator” to maintain the stability of the general circulation.
Defant acknowledged, however, the uncertainty of two key factors: first, the
intensity of the climatic fluctuation as experienced at higher latitudes, and, second, the amount of time necessary for the system to equilibrate: the first might
be small and the second short, “as in the small climate fluctuations of historical
times, or both large, like the climate fluctuations stretching over many millennia that geology has discovered in the Ice Age [Diluvialzeit].”84
Viewing the general circulation as a turbulent phenomenon thus had significant implications for interpreting the historical variability of the earth’s
climate. It convinced Defant that these variations must be due at least in part
to terrestrial rather than astronomical causes. In this sense, the new framework
raised the distinct possibility that a significant shift in atmospheric composition could cause climate variability of great magnitude and long duration.
However, Defant made no explicit mention of the evidence put forward by
Tyndall and Arrhenius to show that human activity could alter the composition of the atmosphere. Readers might well have been left with the impression
that earth’s turbulent atmosphere was self-stabilizing in the face of nearly any
disturbing factor.
Indeed, Defant burnished his picture of the atmosphere with providential
brushstrokes. It was atmospheric turbulence at midlatitudes that
sends the necessary amount of entropy to higher latitudes, regulates the balancing out of temperatures from one season to another, facilitates the development of the temperature conditions at higher latitudes that alone allow men,
animals, and plants to live and flourish, ensures the even distribution of the
sun’s radiation over the whole earth, and thereby prevents that in the equatorial regions everything withers from heat and at higher latitudes, by contrast,
everything freezes from cold. On a planet that is hardly lacking in marvels, it
is one of the most wondrous natural phenomena of all.85

With this passage, Defant placed his study firmly in the Austrian Catholic tradition of physico-theology, which lavished scientific attention on the most unassuming parts of the divine plan. His goal was not simply a “fundamental equation,” but rather a picture of “the earth as a whole,” as he had promised readers
at the outset. Yet his conclusion was ambivalent. Although Defant invited his
audience to marvel at the stability of the earth system, he had also shown them
the conditions under which it could potentially suffer a serious, long-term shift
in climate. Here was a framework in which it was possible, in principle, to solve
for the planetary-scale consequences of human-scale disturbances.

234

Chapter Eight

Conclusion
By the first decade of the twentieth century, atmospheric science had become
“dynamic.” What that meant, however, was not yet clear. In a 1908 article in
the Meteorologische Zeitschrift, the newly appointed director of the ZAMG,
Wilhelm Trabert, insisted that “dynamic” had become a “buzzword” among
atmospheric scientists, its meaning obscured by overuse.86 The phrase “dynamic meteorology” came into use in German, French, and English in the late
1870s. While appropriate methods were up for debate, the label itself seemed
unproblematic: it designated the project of explaining atmospheric motions
mathematically, in terms of thermodynamics and hydrodynamics. By contrast,
the phrase “dynamic climatology” only emerged two decades later, and its
meaning could never be pinned down.
The first use of the phrase “dynamic climatology” is attributed to Tor
Bergeron, one of the leaders of the Bergen school of meteorology, in a 1929
address to the German Meteorological Society.87 At the time, meteorology was
reinventing itself as a mathematical science built on physical principles, and
climatologists felt left behind. Bergeron spoke of a “renewal” (Erneurung) of
climatology. The title under which this speech was published, “Richtlinien
einer dynamischen Klimatologie,” suggests the normative thrust of Bergeron’s
history of the subfield, since Richtlinien might best be translated as instructions
or guidelines. Bergeron initially defined dynamic climatology as the application of hydrodynamics and thermodynamics to the atmosphere. But he also
prescribed a method: identify self-contained atmospheric systems, describe
their Strömungsglieder, or components of flow, and locate the origin of these
components in the general circulation of the atmosphere. This qualitative approach gained enormously in popularity during the Second World War, when
processing data statistically proved too slow for “operational needs.” However,
this method was more often described as “synoptic” than “dynamic” and was
widely criticized for the subjective character of its judgments of “typical” conditions.88 Bergeron further narrowed the meaning of dynamic climatology by
drawing his examples exclusively from frontal analysis. He made it seem as
if a dynamic perspective had been introduced to climatology solely for the
purpose of storm forecasting. On the other hand, Bergeron’s critics were no
more faithful to history. For example, Sergey Chromow in Moscow attempted
to show that Heinrich Dove had invented dynamic climatology half a century
before the Bergen school, “in so far as Dove’s polar and equatorial currents can
be seen as a precursor of the components of large-scale atmospheric flow.”89
Yet Dove had no inkling of a thermodynamic and fluid mechanical explanation

Planetary Disturbances

235

of these processes. Two decades later, geographers were still hashing out the
true meaning of dynamic climatology. The Working Group for Dynamic Climatology of the World Meteorological Organization took two years to agree on
a definition, but they were quickly accused of having conflated dynamic and
synoptic approaches. Indeed, the chair of the working group admitted that “I
did, in fact, originally see the light of true dynamic climatology and recognized
its essential premises; but . . . later lost the way.”90
The definitional problem stemmed in part from the gap in status between
climatology and meteorology at midcentury, particularly in the United States.
There, all eyes were on numerical weather forecasting. Where this work aimed
at long-term forecasts, it might well have been described as “dynamic climatology.” But its developers shunned the label of climatology, which had already
acquired an old-fashioned ring and an association with mindless empiricism.
In the words of Kenneth Hare, who held a PhD in geography, “Treason doth
never prosper. What’s the reason? If it doth prosper, none dare call it treason.
Substitute ‘climatology’ for ‘treason,’ and the point is made.”91 In this terminological confusion we can begin to see why it has taken so long to grasp the
historical significance of dynamic climatology.
And yet this controversy distracts from a far more important shift in meaning that took place in the first two decades of the century: a transformation
in the very meaning of “climate.” Climate was now a concept applicable at
multiple scales, from the local up to planetary. As recently as 1895, in the definitions of Wladimir Köppen, the general circulation had marked the limit
where climatology edged into meteorology.92 In showing how to apply a climatological tool like Austausch on the scale of the atmosphere as a whole,
Schmidt, Exner, and Defant had laid claim to the general circulation as an
object of climatological research. Indeed, they had given substance to the notion of the “planetary climate,” the Weltklima. One might object that studies
of the general circulation had always been climatological, in so far as, outside
of the tropics, they had treated time-averaged states of the atmosphere. But
only with the work of Hann and his collaborators did these studies become
reflective about what was being averaged away. Just as dynamic meteorology
was defined in 1885 as the study of disturbances to atmospheric equilibrium,
dynamic climatology emerged in imperial Austria circa 1900 as the study of
disturbances to the earth’s climate system. It thus became possible for the
first time to investigate the global effects of local climatic change. Climate had
become a multiscalar, dynamic concept.
Central to this transformation were the representational practices of imperialroyal science. The rise of dynamic climatology in imperial Austria depended

236 Chapter Eight

on innovative techniques of scaling, from tabletop models of the planetary atmosphere, to analogies between the hemispheric turbulence and the palpable
“restlessness” of ordinary winds. The mathematical vocabulary of Austausch
and APE was the physicist’s correlate to the visual and literary techniques
examined in the preceding chapters, all of which aimed to achieve a synthetic
overview without effacing difference at the smallest scales. In the work of
Hann’s group, the goal of climatology remained, as Hann had defined it, to
produce “a maximally life-like picture” of atmospheric phenomena. Hence the
wonderfully evocative analogies, poetic descriptions, and appeals to intuition
that we find in the writings of Schmidt, Exner, and Defant. Words and images
were more than illustrations of equations. They led into a realm of complexity
to which analysis was inadequate, but which might yet be grasped via physical
intuition.

*3*
The Work of Scaling

Chapter 9

The Forest-Climate Question

When Sigmund Freud sought a metaphor to describe the psychic effects
of the civilizing process, he likened it to the draining of a swamp. The id,
the seat of the primitive drives, was like a wild landscape, as yet untamed by
human hands. The displacement of id by ego, the adult self, was akin to reclaiming wasteland for agriculture. Freud asked, “But have we a right to assume the survival of something that was originally there, alongside of what
was later derived from it? Undoubtedly.”1 In the realm of the psyche, he argued, the id makes its presence known through experiences of the uncanny,
encounters that can be interpreted as reminders of the seething impulses
of the id. The ecological analogy is suggestive. In the realm of the psyche
as in the nonhuman landscape, the civilizing process can have unintended
consequences. In the case of the swamp, the forces that previously ruled this
landscape have merely been pacified, not eliminated. The unpredictable
floods that plague a land reclaimed from swamp are uncanny in their own
way. Before the First World War, one of the more prominent discourses on
civilization’s discontents in Austria concerned the devastating environmental
effects of agricultural cultivation. And one of the features of that discourse
sure to strike a man of Freud’s interests was the contested status of memory.
How accurately might inhabitants remember the land that was “originally
there”?
In a widely circulated 1878 pamphlet by Freud’s Vienna colleague Friedrich Simony, Freud could have read the following testimony from a northern
German forester:

240

Chapter Nine

What you report about the water sources struck a chord with me [ist mir aus
der Seele gesprochen]. In my capacity as the first forest official of the local province, formerly of the kingdom of Hannover, I have spent twenty five years hiking through what was a once densely forested valley, now sparsely wooded . . .
and on this basis I can say how extraordinarily the water conditions have
changed. . . . The springs and groundwater were once [einst] sufficient for
alders and beeches to grow.2

Evidence of climate change rested on memories. These were memories that
everyone living in the region could be expected to share, memories of a past
that could be gestured at rather than measured, a past evoked by the simple
term einst or “once.”
And yet, even at the time, certain commentators noted the inconsistency
of memory when it came to questions of climate. Eduard Bruckner, later a
professor at Vienna, famously observed that in dry periods, people claimed
that deforestation was responsible for desiccation, but in times of floods it was
often claimed that deforestation increased rainfall.3 As the 1905 Handbook of
Forest Politics observed, until the middle of the nineteenth century, evidence
of anthropogenic (human-induced) climate change rested on “historical comparison,” namely, on local observations linking human interventions to natural
disasters or to a general degradation of agricultural conditions. “This train
of thought, which continues to lead people astray today, has something inherently seductive, because it is tied to facts that are displayed to everyone’s
eyes and therefore exert the full force of proof on public opinion. In contrast, the public faces the tremendously difficult task of dividing causes and
effects, and excluding the exaggerated conclusions and errors deriving from
subjective impressions.” As the author went on to elaborate, “public opinion”
(die öffentliche Meinung) was prone to certain errors when it came to climate
change: a tendency to downplay the intensity of past phenomena in comparison to present ones and a willingness to ascribe any and all “adverse natural
phenomena” to the accelerating pace of forest destruction— even in an era
when forests were successfully being preserved.4 Another expert dismissed
as “legendary” reports that deforestation had desiccated the karst lands of
southeastern Europe: “All the reports that are widespread among the public
today— that today for the first time masses of rubble from the Isonzo are being
carried into the plain, that now in Dalmatia olive trees no longer flourish as in
the time of ancient Rome, that the soils have all been swept away, that it used
to rain more often, that there is no morning dew because of the scarcity of
forest-moisture, and that springs have run dry because of deforestation— are

The Forest-Climate Question 241

all legends [Sagen] that people tell each other without investigating what there
is to them.”5 Or, as the Neue Freie Presse put it, “The masses are indeed so easily swayed, they are content with belief in the place of knowledge; the former
is much more convenient.”6 Late nineteenth-century Austrian debates over
climate change were thus caught between an eighteenth-century ideal of rational debate and a fin de siècle anxiety about the suggestibility of the masses.
The Handbook of Forest Politics, for instance, by no means dismissed the relevance of subjective experience. On the contrary, it noted that the evidence for
climate change produced by scientific experts “furnished nothing surprising,
in that it corresponds perfectly to human sensation and conjecture.” 7 One
wonders: what room was there for evidence that failed to corroborate public
opinion?
This was the question at stake in the 1870s when a few bold scientists set
out to counter a widespread belief about the climatic impact of deforestation.
The late Habsburg Monarchy witnessed a series of clashes over the reality of
anthropogenic climate change, debates that will sound familiar, at first glance,
to twenty-first-century readers. Such debates, then as now, are necessarily negotiations between the spatial and temporal frameworks of scientific evidence
and those of collective memory. They are, in the terms of this book, exercises
in scaling.
Scaling, as we have seen, is a bodily experience, tied to movement through
space and time. Yet, as Husserl observed, it is also a social process. The “near”
is defined in part by what is familiar, by one’s own community, while the “far”
corresponds to what is foreign. What we learn of the “far” often comes more
from other people than from firsthand experience.8 When we consider scaling
across dimensions of time, this social aspect is especially conspicuous. Our
access to the past, to what is distant in time rather than space, typically comes
from memories other than our own. Scaling thus becomes a process of commensuration between dimensions marked out by scientists’ tools, on one hand,
and by communal identities and collective memory, on the other.

A H u r ly - B u r ly o v e r C l i m a t e C h a n g e
Historians looking for the roots of our present ideas about anthropogenic climate change have dwelled on the long life of what they have called the “desiccation theory,” the idea that clearing an area of its vegetation could result in diminished rainfall. This was typically a theory of local rather than global change,
although deforestation was the leading cause of increasing levels of atmospheric
carbon dioxide until the twentieth century. Richard Grove has traced the origin

242

Chapter Nine

of this theory back to sixteenth-century debates over the consequences of European imperialism in Latin America. As he and others have shown, efforts
to demonstrate the beneficial climatic influence of forests were linked to critiques of the impacts of European colonization on indigenous environments
and societies. From its roots in encounters between Europeans and indigenous
peoples from the islands of the South Pacific to the plains of North America,
by the eighteenth century the desiccation theory had convinced many people
of the climatic benefits of forests.9 This theory has drawn the interest of environmental historians as a sign of a lost ecological consciousness; as a form of
ecological anticolonialism in Latin America; or, on the contrary, as a means of
legitimating European imperialism in Asia and Africa.10 However, with a few
exceptions, much of this effort to get at the meaning of the desiccation theory
neglects the evidence that this was less a theory than a question.
In fact, in much of central and eastern Europe in the nineteenth century
and into the twentieth, the so-called desiccation theory went by the name of
the Wald-Klima-Frage, the forest-climate question, and equivalents in other
languages. As one forester remarked in 1901, “Seldom before and likely in the
future has a question been debated and addressed from so many sides and so
relentlessly as the forest-climate-question.”11 The putative climatic benefits of
forested land were vigorously debated throughout this region, as David Moon
has chronicled for Russia.12 Why was the question so charged in this part of
the world? Conditions on the ground are part of the explanation. Compared to
western Europe, much of central and eastern Europe is prone to dryness and
extremes of temperature. In addition, the Austrian and Russian empires were
both more heavily forested in their centers than on their peripheries; hence
the strong impression made on imperial officials by the absence of forest in
the grasslands of southern Russia and central Asia, as in the karst lands of the
Balkans and the Hungarian steppe.
In the Austrian lands, the debate over anthropogenic climate change played
out in the imperial parliament in Vienna, in provincial assemblies, and in the
press, particularly in the growing ranks of forestry and agricultural newspapers. These were forums not only for experts but also for “countless simple
country folk, who do not tire of bringing their own perspectives and experiences to public awareness.”13 As Vienna’s liberal daily, the Neue Freie Presse,
observed in 1879, “No question has been debated as frequently, as widely,
and at times as fiercely as that of the influence of an area’s forest-cover on its
climate and water sources.”14 It was a Wirrwarr, a hurly-burly, in the words of
Eduard Bruckner, one of the scientists working for the Austrian state whose
work productively engaged it.15

The Forest-Climate Question 243

The formulation “forest-climate question” invited comparison to other hot
topics of the day, such as “the woman question” or “the Jewish question.” As
the historian Holly Case has recently observed, this locution was a strategy
for elevating what might have been a local social issue to a matter of debate for
the new international public sphere.16 It is a sign that we as historians must
attend to the politics of scale. At stake was the authority of local, imperial, or
international governance. As ordinary citizens grappled with this question,
they scaled between the vernacular terms in which they framed their natural
and social environment and the framework presented by dynamic climatology.
As a result, a remarkable shift becomes apparent in popular discourse. For the
first time, nonscientists began to refer to “climate” not as a characteristic of a
local environment but as a dynamic system of planetary dimensions.

The Politics of Forests
In the Habsburg Monarchy, as in other nineteenth-century European states,
forest policy weighed the interventionist tradition of the eighteenth-century
“police state” against the ascendant principle of private property. Rights to the
forest had been a particularly tense issue in the Austrian lands since the emancipation of forced labor in 1848. This act deprived peasants of the use of their
lords’ forests and pastures. The result was an increase in what landowners
perceived as “wood theft,” even as peasants believed they were simply taking
what was rightfully theirs. The first half of the nineteenth century also saw the
founding of the empire’s first forestry academies, beginning with Mariabrunn
in Lower Austria in 1805. In the absolutist spirit of the eighteenth century,
these institutions trained foresters to be loyal state servants, not researchers.
After 1848, the rising class of professional foresters accused peasants of illegally
allowing their animals to graze in the forests and wantonly felling trees. As
evidence, they pointed to a growing timber shortage, though historians have
noted the lack of evidence to support that claim.17 Foresters also insisted that
woodlands offered a range of public benefits: they increased rainfall, moderated temperatures, shielded the surroundings from winds, and protected
against floods, avalanches, rockfalls, and erosion. Invoking the medieval tradition of the Bannwald, or protected forest, nineteenth-century foresters called
on the state for legal protection.18
The first empire-wide law for the protection of forests was signed in 1852,
giving the state the right to intervene in privately owned forests in the interest
of the “public good.” The intentions behind this law remain open to debate.
In part, major floods in 1848 and 1851 may have inspired the move to protect

244

Chapter Nine

forests as flood breaks. Historians have noted, though, that the law aimed to
maintain productive forests for the sake of industry, most of which was still
state owned; in this sense, it was oriented more toward the use than the protection of forests.19 Although the law remained in effect throughout the life of
the Monarchy, it was rarely enforced.
By the 1870s there was agitation from associations of foresters for a stronger
measure of state intervention, inspired partly by the example of France. The
Second Empire, under Napoleon III, enacted a law for the “reforestation of the
mountains” in 1860, in reaction to major floods in southern France. Prominent
scientists like Antoine Becquerel lent their authority to this policy by attesting
to the climatic benefits of forests.20 Austrian officials later visited France to
study the implementation of these measures.21 Thereafter, the forest-climate
question was repeatedly discussed in the pages of the Journal of the Austrian
Society for Meteorology. However, publications on the topic for a general audience were still rare.22
Then, in 1872, a devastating flood in western Bohemia prompted speculation that deforestation had left the region vulnerable. Bohemian foresters
argued that depletion of the forests was to blame for abrupt swings between
drought and flooding. Reporting on the official investigation of the flood damage, the botanist Emanuel Purkyne tried to counter speculation that forest
destruction had brought a decrease in rainfall.23 Subsequently, the Bohemian
Diet considered but failed to pass a law requiring afforestation.
Nonetheless, the forest-climate question continued to simmer and became
a frequent subject of debate in the popular press. The topic was raised at the
first International Congress of Agriculturalists and Foresters, which met in
Vienna in 1873 in conjunction with the World Exposition. The discussion
barely skimmed the surface, but the congress did issue a call for an international observing system to study the climatic influence of forests. Meanwhile,
in the exhibit halls, the public could scrutinize displays of forest-climatological
measurements made in Prussia, Bavaria, and Bohemia.24 In the face of rising
concern, the imperial government began to consider a change of course. A reorganization of the empire-wide forestry administration was announced by imperial decree in 1873, giving oversight of state forests to the ministry of agriculture; five years later, a new imperial forest law was drafted but never enacted.25
A new wave of concern arose when severe floods struck the Alpine lands
in 1881. Approximately fifty-one people lost their lives, fewer than in Bohemia in 1872. Nonetheless, as one historian of forestry has argued, this tragedy
prompted a qualitatively new response from Vienna. For the first time, the
imperial state acted as a humanitarian force.26 In doing so, the state was able

The Forest-Climate Question 245

to take advantage of the railway and telegraph networks, as well as of its newly
integrated network of professional scientists. In the wake of the catastrophe,
the state commissioned scientific experts in Tyrol and Carinthia to investigate
the flooded areas and determine the most significant causal factor, whether
abnormal rainfall or excessive deforestation.
Further support for forest protection came, surprisingly, from large landowners. In the 1848 era, owners of large wooded estates had resisted state
intervention into their practices of forest management. But socioeconomic
conditions had changed considerably since then, and it was no longer clear
what kind of policy best served the interests of this elite. Many landowners
came to see a stronger forest law as working in their favor. They likely hoped
to free themselves from peasant demands for traditional rights of forest use,
to profit from higher prices for wood, and to exploit the forests for their own
manufacturing enterprises.27 At a dramatic meeting of the Association of Austrian Foresters in 1883, Prince Karl von Schwarzenberg appealed to members
of the landed aristocracy to support a new forest law, stronger than that of 1852.
He played to their fears of wood speculators and of a swelling proletariat. His
argument was that stricter state protection would harm only small landowners.
Once middling farmers were forced to sell their land, the proprietors of large
estates would be free to buy them at low cost. Even better, the nobility would
thereby prevent this land from falling into the hands of capitalists. They could
simultaneously rescue the forests from clearance and save peasants from proletarianization. Using implicitly anti-Semitic language, Schwarzenberg argued
that large estate owners were “in a position to take up the battle against big
capitalists” and were thus “compelled to acquire small parcels of land in order to prevent the mass liquidation of farms [Guterschächterei, an allusion to
Jewish ritual slaughter].”28 Schwarzenberg helped to seal an alliance between
the landed aristocracy and professional foresters against small landowners.
So it was that, in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the Reichsrat
confronted a series of proposals to strengthen forest protection. In the course
of these debates, elected representatives repeatedly testified to the beneficial influence of forests on the surrounding climate. The Galician aristocrat
Stanisław Mieroszowski attested that the forest served as a climate “regulator,”
since it “tempers extremes of cold in the winter and moderates extremes of
heat in the summer; attracts atmospheric precipitation to itself in great quantities; collects humidity in its underground reservoirs; and returns it gradually,
especially in summertime, to the streams and rivers.”29 Sometimes the “fact”
of the forest’s climatic influence was cited instead as a critique of the aristocracy and their land-use practices. Thus a representative who identified himself

246

Chapter Nine

as a Galician farmer accused the large landowners of a “pillage economy”
(Devastationswirtschaft), the effects of which were not only a timber shortage. “Entire woodlands, which once adorned our land and protected it from
harsh winds, fell victim to this barbaric economy. (Agreement.) I don’t need to
mention, that this has the most unfortunate consequences for the climate.”30 It
would seem that the question was closed: forests were to be protected for the
sake of a healthy and fertile climate, in the name of the public good.

T h e L e g a l Q ua n da ry
However, the confident tone of these statements belies the complexity of the
matter at hand. As a legislative issue, what mattered was not simply whether
forests modified the climate of their surroundings, but how wide an area was
affected. The spatial extent of the effect was decisive, because imperial forest
legislation contained a pregnant ambiguity. The Forest Law of 1852 allowed
the state to intervene in privately owned forests in cases where it was necessary in order to protect “the public good.” But how was one to know, in any
given case, whether “the public good” was at stake? How were the public and
its interests to be defined? Likewise, the law of March 1883 requiring flood
protection in Tyrol divided responsibility among the imperial government,
the crown land, and the Interessenten, or interested parties. But who were the
parties affected by the alleged climatic impact of deforestation? The problem,
as the foremost historian of Austrian forest policy observes, was that “the concept of the interested parties was not clearly delineated.”31
Gradually, legal scholars and policy makers recognized the difficulty of
defining the public affected by the clearing of any given forest stand. As the
author of an 1898 history of Austrian agricultural policy put it, “we are indeed missing any more precise specification of what might count as a ‘public
interest,’” and he wondered how the climatic effect of deforestation was to be
weighed.32 In 1884 the ministry of agriculture, acknowledging this ambiguity,
called for expert investigation “with the utmost rigor” into the effects of forest
clearing on “agricultural conditions in general.” Forestry experts were called
on to determine the “repercussions” to be expected from forest clearing “from
a climatic and atmospheric perspective for the agricultural conditions of the
afflicted province or district.”33
The gradual recognition of this ambiguity is evidence that a shift was occurring in environmental thought. Consider the language of the debate between
Austrian liberals and foresters. In the view of many liberals, the forest was
indeed a “public good,” but the implication was not that it therefore required

The Forest-Climate Question 247

protection.34 On the contrary, this meant that everyone should be free to use
the forest as they saw fit, without restriction, regulated only by the market. The
forest, liberals said, should be as freely accessible as air. Foresters objected to
this comparison on the grounds that deforestation spoiled the local climate.
They argued that forests must not be treated like air, subject to unlimited use
by all, because forests were a limited and vulnerable resource, while “the air as
a public good cannot be misused, cannot be polluted at will.”35 Indeed, David
Ricardo had argued that no price can be set on air, water, or the pressure of
the atmosphere, because these resources are boundless; they do not require
a choice to be made between use and preservation.36 This would seem to be
a simple and self-evident distinction: forests were a limited resource; air was
not. The irony is that the foresters of the 1870s were arguing precisely that
deforestation threatened the air. Nonetheless, they persisted in contrasting
the bounded forest with the boundless air. Arguably, they did so because they
could not quite imagine how something as uncontained as the atmosphere
could be vulnerable to local human actions.
What was needed was a framework for evaluating the scale on which the
atmosphere was threatened by deforestation. Think about the range of dimensions in play: from the microscale of plant transpiration, to the mesoscale
winds passing through or over a forest canopy, to the macroscale patterns of
the global atmospheric circulation. In principle, the dimensions of the climatic
effect would determine which level of governance within the Austrian half of
the Monarchy was responsible for forest protection— whether municipalities,
the diets of the crown lands, or the imperial administration in Vienna— or
whether this was rightly a private matter. The question was, how far beyond
the borders of the forest (and how far into the future) is a forest capable of
modifying the surrounding atmosphere? This legal question propelled a research program for forest climatology.

The Rise of a Research Program
Until the 1870s, the small body of scientific literature on the climatic effects
of forests had been based almost entirely on anecdote and speculation. The
literature generally treated “the forest” in general, failing to distinguish between different types of forest and different geographic conditions. The most
common references dated back to the 1820s and 1830s. Most prominent was
the French military officer and hobby naturalist Alexandre Moreau de Jonnès,
who contended, on the basis of comparative geography, that a healthy climate
required neither too little nor too much forested land.37 In Austria in 1831,

248

Chapter Nine

Gottlieb von Zötl, an assistant professor at the forestry academy in Mariabrunn, had made the case that forests lower the surrounding temperature
by blocking winds and absorbing sunlight.38 Zötl’s claims were repeated by
others, but no concerted effort was made to verify them empirically. By the
same token, textbooks on “agricultural meteorology” for forestry students
tended to be overviews of meteorology as a whole, diluted for easy consumption, rather than targeted discussions of phenomena relevant to agriculture.39
An 1853 article in a Vienna agricultural newspaper lamented this oversight:
“Why is it that we are so often mistaken in the evaluation of a local climate?
Simply because for so long farmers and foresters did not write down enough of
the observations that they made of it.”40 In 1869, when Julius Hann addressed
the forest-climate question in the third volume of the Journal of the Austrian
Meteorological Society, he admitted that a farmer could still “embarrass” a climatologist by asking whether forest clearing would threaten his harvests by
altering rainfall patterns. At present, the climatologist was “unable to confirm
these theoretically well-founded fears with any precision.”41
The publication in 1873 of preliminary results from Ernst Ebermayer’s experimental forest in Bavaria heralded a new era.42 Three years later, at the
1876 International Statistical Congress in Budapest, scientists considered a
proposal for the international coordination of research into the forest-climate
question. The proposal was submitted by Josef Roman Lorenz von Liburnau, who had been appointed three years earlier as an advisor to the newly
expanded agricultural ministry in Vienna. In the course of his career, during
postings in Salzburg, Fiume, and Vienna, Lorenz had published extensively on
a range of natural environments, from the moors of Upper Austria, to the coast
of the Adriatic, to the Danube river valley. He had won the authority to speak
as an “imperial-royal scientist,” an expert on the territory of the Monarchy
most broadly. For the Congress’s section on agricultural meteorology, Lorenz
drew up an ambitious research program to collect meteorological data relevant to agriculture. But who would take responsibility for producing this data?
Lorenz hoped to convince his international audience that the burden should
fall to meteorological institutes.43 He hoped to learn from his international
colleagues whether state institutes of meteorology were prepared to take up
research on agricultural meteorology and climatology, or whether these would
fall “of necessity, in the last instance” to agricultural ministries.44
Privately, Lorenz reported that the discussion of his proposal in Budapest
had been no more than preliminary. “The related discussions were, as is almost
always the case at this conference, quite rushed and perfunctory; one is always
trying to be done with it at the designated time, because again some festivity

The Forest-Climate Question 249

is about to begin. The value of such conferences evidently lies not in what
one accomplishes there, but in the preparations that such conferences inspire
and which always have a lasting value or even lead to significant proposals.”45
Still, the congress issued a brief resolution calling on “the governments of all
states” to establish observing stations for agricultural meteorology that would
be responsible for forecasting, phenological observations, and studies of the
climatic influence of deforestation and reforestation.46
Unlike the statisticians, attendees at the Association of German Foresters in
Eisenach in 1876 could not be faulted for a lack of interest in the forest-climate
question. Lorenz came to this congress prepared to redirect the typically
“wild” discussion of the question around eight scientific propositions. On this
international stage, Lorenz introduced a strategic shift in scale. “In order to
understand correctly the circulation of water, it is necessary to realize that the
earth and its atmosphere share a store of water of a fixed size— the circulation
of which, however, brings a very unequal distribution to different places at different times.” He then pointed out that existing research had demonstrated the
forest’s climatic influence within its borders, but had left open the question of
“the influence of the forest on the climate of the more proximate and more distant surroundings.”47 The key question was the spatial and temporal scale of
the phenomenon, depending on the type of forest and its geographic location.
Lorenz underlined that any climatic influence of forests on their surroundings
would have to be dynamic in nature. It wouldn’t do to assume, as foresters
previously had, that the forest’s effect was as simple as “living quarters are
colder over an ice cellar and warmer over an oven; sapienti sat.”48 Rather,
the forest’s effect could only be explained dynamically, in terms of the deflection and modification of air currents as they passed through or over a forest.
Lorenz was arguing that the question had to be analyzed not only in its regional
dimensions, but also from the perspective of the planetary water budget— any
regional effect would have to be consistent with this global model. He was
introducing foresters to a new way of thinking about climate: the perspective of dynamic climatology as it was then being worked out at the ZAMG.
To Lorenz’s frustration, however, these were not the terms in which foresters wished to discuss the matter. As a German newspaper described, “The
discussion did not, however, move in the direction of exact research, but
rather mainly supplied countless and repetitive examples of the kind that are
hardly suited to decide the question.”49 With time running short, the assembly
reached the conclusion that too few of the assembled foresters could even
make sense of Lorenz’s points. All Lorenz achieved was a resolution calling for
further discussion at a later point. Defeated, he wrote a colleague that perhaps

250

Chapter Nine

the foresters would at least concede that their conviction “still has too little
exact evidence.”50 It might be tempting to call Lorenz— in today’s terms— a
climate skeptic and a merchant of doubt, if it weren’t for the fact that he was
right: the existing evidence was entirely inconclusive, and no scientific consensus had been reached.
According to Josef Wessely, the director of the forestry academy at Mariabrunn until its transfer to Vienna in 1875, “the entire congress was hogwash.”
Wessely was already sixty years old at the time. Like Lorenz, his career had
been highly mobile, taking him from South Tyrol to Carniola to Moravia and
even the Banat— and affording the opportunity to gain expertise on the forests
of each region. With the state’s liberal turn in the 1860s, Wessely had begun
to advocate expanding Austria’s export of timber. To that end, he sought to
inform the public about the nature and distribution of “Austria’s treasure trove
of wood” in each and every crown land. Based on his observations and calculations, Wessely claimed that Austria possessed an “excessive uninvested capital
in the forests,” which “could be harvested at any time without detriment to
its long-term sustainability.” He therefore viewed the outcry over the climatic
impact of deforestation as a threat to Austria’s forest industry, and he had no
patience for the unscientific manner in which the matter tended to be discussed
by foresters. As he reported privately on the 1877 forestry congress, the foresters
weren’t interested in “ascertaining the truth,” but rather in “filching a cloak of
rational judgment for their homegrown prejudices.”51 The ensuing discussions
tended to be “total hogwash.” Wessely privately hurled insults at his opponents:
one was the “giant swindler,” another “the knight with the sad face,” and another “the mercenary”; of one he wrote that he couldn’t rightly say if he was a
“Jesuit, pedant, or ass-kisser.” It was also obvious to Wessely that no one had
bothered to read his proposal, since they hadn’t taken the brochure with them
and couldn’t have read it during the debate. Wessely was left feeling alienated
from what he perceived as an anti-intellectual culture: “how long have I experienced from so many sides— entirely undeservedly, in my opinion— hate,
slander, anger, and persecution. So that I often want to slap myself for being a
miserable Austrian, or at least for not having used my power to emigrate to a
land where those who dare to deviate just a few degrees from the accepted line
are less mistreated than in our Heimat, on the so-called blue Danube.”52

Going Public
Nonetheless, Lorenz persevered. His 1878 book Forest, Climate, and Water
brought his dynamic perspective on the forest-climate question to the German-

The Forest-Climate Question 251

speaking public. An American author called this book “the best popular discussion of forest influences by the most prominent scientific investigator of
the subject.”53 It appeared as a volume of the series the Forces of Nature: A
Natural-Scientific Popular Library, which was priced low and advertised in
venues including women’s magazines. In this widely accessible book, Lorenz
taught readers to differentiate environmental factors according to the spatial
scale on which they might affect the climate.
He used the term “modifying factors” (Modificatoren) to designate conditions that contributed “a very significant alteration to the pure solar climate.”
These modifying factors “have a very varied range. Some are capable, if not
of completely changing the climate of a large part of the world, then at least of
very clearly influencing it. The effect of others reaches only a small parcel of
land or even only very narrowly delimited points.” He deemed it “sufficient
for the correct interpretation of climatic phenomena” to differentiate three
scales of modifying factors. First, the “global” factors, such as the shapes of the
continents and oceans and the major ocean currents. Second-order factors included orography, exposition, waterways, and vegetation. Crucially, however,
Lorenz observed that these same factors made up the category of third-order
and smaller factors. It all depended “precisely on the standpoint of the person
judging. For a small village, an individual parcel of forested land, even an individual garden or farmed field has a particular shape, exposition, water supply,
and distribution of vegetation, as for an entire country.”54 In other words, the
scale of observation was decisive.
In the final chapter of Forest, Climate, and Water, Lorenz addressed the
implications of dynamic climatology for legislation. The goal, as he saw it,
was to avoid two possible extremes: either completely prohibiting timbering
or leaving it to the mercy of the free market. It was misguided to divide the
world into “friends” or “enemies” of the forest, Waldheuler or Waldschinder.
Instead, legislators should follow the principle of intervening only in cases
where the public good needed to be defended: “It is thus a matter above all
of recognizing in which respects and in which cases the forest influences the
public good or the interests of specific neighbors.” He admitted that this
“influence” could never be determined with certainty. Yet one could draw a
distinction between cases where timbering was economically necessary and
others where it was avoidable; further distinctions could be made by estimating the scope of the climatic effect, since “the sphere of influence of the forest
has very variable dimensions.” In his view, preventing the overall expansion of
farmland and pasturage in central Europe was unfeasible, given current rates
of population growth. “For the preservation of mankind— for whose sake, of

252

Chapter Nine

course, the whole issue has been raised and the legislation set in motion— an
expansion of agriculture and pasturage is indispensable.”55 This was the crux
of Lorenz’s position: if the law was to serve the public good, the benefits of
forest protection would have to be weighed against the public’s need for economic development.
Still, adjudicating any given case would require judging the dimensions of
the forest’s climatic influence. Lorenz therefore led his reader through several examples of “effects of different dimensions,” in order to consider “what
might be concluded legally and in relation to enforcement.” If wind patterns
indicated that the impact of deforestation would cross national borders, then
effective laws could only be created through international bodies. The movement for bird protection furnished an example of success in this respect. In
contrast, in the case of the clearing of a small parcel of forested land, the matter
was generally a private one. The neighbors had been fortunate to live in the
proximity of a forest, but they did not have a right to continue to enjoy its benefits. The situation was different, however, if deforestation would render the
neighbors’ land infertile. Then it became necessary to consider the interest of
future generations and their right to be able to feed themselves. Thus the legal
decision to permit forest clearing or not would need to be made case by case,
taking into account the scale of the expected climatic effect. If clearing were not
permitted, the forest owner was to be paid a subvention by the administrative
body corresponding to the “interested parties,” whether municipality, district,
or crown land.56
Reviewers clearly grasped the point. Writers for the liberal Neue Freie Presse
and the Landwirtschaftliche Zeitung appreciated the correction Lorenz provided to “general” opinion. Both reviewers lauded Lorenz’s book as a model
of writing for a “popular” or “lay” audience, which taught readers how to use
a scientific framework to reach their own practical conclusions. Both further
praised Lorenz for having countered prevalent exaggerations with a realistic
assessment of the scale of the problem. “It is gratifying to read . . . especially
that the popular exaggerations of the consequences of deforestation have been
reduced to their proper size [auf ihr richtiges Maß], without in the least denying
the significance of the demonstrable climatic influence of forests.”57 Likewise,
the Landwirtschaftliche Zeitung acknowledged Lorenz’s authority in evaluating the relative significance of the many physical factors in play: “Anyone who
sets out to write about the relationship between forest, climate, and water in
an original way, which properly illuminates the matter, must have surveilled so
many forces of nature in their mutual influence, and acquired such a facility
for judging natural phenomena, as until now few minds have been capable of

The Forest-Climate Question 253

doing.”58 As these lines demonstrate, Lorenz had won a new kind of authority, one associated with the work of scaling between phenomena of disparate
dimensions.
Lorenz’s accomplishment in this public debate was to expand the scale
of the concept of climate. Mid-nineteenth-century theories of anthropogenic
climate change had hinged on a regional definition of climate. Climate was
assumed to be a property of a region, a unit that was more than local yet less
than hemispheric. It was this interpretation of climate that made plausible the
claim that clear-cutting should be addressed at the imperial level. Once this
claim was subjected to legal analysis in the 1870s, the precise extent of the
suspected climatic effect began to matter. The competing levels of authority
within the multinational state drove empirical inquiry into the dimensions of
atmospheric phenomena. Likewise, the resources to investigate this question
depended on the structure of the multinational state. The investigation was
shaped, first, by the state’s capacity to coordinate research across widely divergent ecosystems, and, second, by its corps of imperial-royal scientists trained
to think synthetically and comparatively across those locales. Throughout his
career, an imperial-royal scientist like Lorenz von Liburnau honed his ability
to analyze a system at multiple scales: to identify, for any given dimensions of
observation, which forces must be calculated exactly and which could be neglected or approximated. This is what atmospheric physicists today call scale
analysis, and it remains an essential part of their work.

A Cactus in the Bohemian Forest
So far we have followed the story of the forest-climate question primarily
as it can be pieced together from the public record: parliamentary debates,
newspapers, conference proceedings, scientific journals. Now we come to a
remarkable stash of letters in an archive in Prague. They might be compared
to the email exchanges among climate scientists that were exposed in the “Climategate” scandal of 2009. That is to say, this correspondence takes us behind
the scenes of the public debate, revealing the strategies adopted by scientists
under public attack. These documents shed light on another aspect of the
Habsburg politics of scale: the making of the “imperial-royal scientist.”
The letters belong to an individual who left barely a trace in the public
record. Only the most careful reader of the transcript of the parliamentary
debates would recognize his name. Emanuel Purkyne (see figure 32) was the
eldest son of Jan Evangelista Purkyne, a physiologist known as one of the
founding intellects of the Czech “cultural awakening,” the early nineteenth-

254

Chapter Nine

F i g u r e 3 2 . Emanuel Purkyne (1831– 82).

century movement promoting popular Enlightenment, the refinement of the
Czech language, and scholarship on the history, culture, and welfare of the
Czech nation. His mother was the daughter of a professor of physiology and
anatomy at Berlin. He had grown up in Breslau, where his father taught physiology, and did not live in Bohemia until the age of nineteen, when the elder
Purkyne was offered a post at the University of Prague. In Breslau, Emanuel
Purkyne was exposed to a cosmopolitan, humanistic, Pan-Slavic patriotism, a
program his father would continue to advance throughout his career.59 Emanuel trained under his father as a plant physiologist, later joined by Julius Sachs
and Ladislav celakovsky, the orphaned sons of two of his father’s scientific colleagues. Upon arriving in Prague, Emanuel was found to be so deficient in the
humanistic disciplines that he was forced to complete two years of gymnasium
before enrolling at the university.60 In 1855, he became a professor of natural
science at the forestry academy in Weißwasser/Bela pod Bezdezem, Bohemia,
an institution founded in that year on the initiative of large landowners.61 This

The Forest-Climate Question 255

was one of only four forestry schools in the Habsburg lands at the time; the
others could be found in Lower Austria, Moravia, and central Slovakia. Fortunate as he may have been to land an academic position, Purkyne stuck out
at the forestry academy like a cactus in a pine forest.
Purkyne’s interests were those of a plant physiologist and geographer, not
a professional forester. His true passion was the microscopic investigation of
plant anatomy, but he was repeatedly called on to investigate other topics of
greater interest to the Bohemian public. In this respect, he was part of the efflorescence of plant geography in the Czech lands in the 1850s. His research was
published primarily in Czech, often in his father’s journal ziva. His early work
included, for instance, a study of the dependence of vegetation in peat bogs
on a complex set of environmental conditions, and the conditions favorable to
the spread of a certain species of tree.62 He also compiled a catalog of the flora
of Bohemia in the commission of the Bohemian National Museum, and for
over a decade he investigated the causes of regional differences in agricultural
yield for the Czech National Museum in Prague.63 It was in the course of this
research that he began to doubt the reliability of existing measurements of
climate in forested areas.
To explore this question, Purkyne carried out what was likely the world’s
first systematic microclimatological research, in the garden of the Bohemian
National Museum and on the city outskirts, starting in 1857. He used thermometers installed on varying terrain, both shaded and exposed, at different heights above the ground, and at various depths in the soil. In this way,
Purkyne pioneered the study of climate in the lowest reaches of the atmosphere, the climate near the ground.
As Purkyne put it, “I saw that on a limited area numerous climates could
be found next to each other.”64 As a botanist and physiologist, Purkyne recognized the significance of these measurements: here were the climatic conditions that made life possible. He effectively founded the subfield of microclimatology, with its vital applications to agriculture and human health, decades
before researchers in Germany and Russia: before the forest-meteorological
observations begun by Ebermayer in Bavaria in 1866, before the agricultural
climatology of Voeikov and Dokuchaev on the Russian steppes in the 1880s,
and well before the better-known work of Rudolf Geiger at the turn of the
century.65
It is tempting to say that Purkyne was following his father’s injunction, in
the first issue of ziva, to relativize the human scale. Human needs could not
be the only measure of significance in “infinite nature,” his father had written.
For the younger Purkyne, this principle entailed a critique of observations

256

Chapter Nine

carried out unthinkingly at spatial dimensions convenient to human activity.
Measurements made at eye level, anywhere it was easy to place a thermometer, in areas where scientists happened to live— these were not evidence that
could be used to gauge the long-term stability or variability of climate. Climate
displayed different degrees of variability at different scales.
Purkyne noticed, in particular, that measurements of temperature and rainfall are affected dynamically by their exposure to different air currents. Exposure
depends on the natural and built environment and height above the ground.
Greater exposure to winds— for instance, on a high peak or tower— could significantly reduce the amount of precipitation measured. Purkyne pointed, for
example, to the dramatic difference between a series of measurements of rainfall
taken from an ombrometer in the courtyard of the University of Breslau and
those made from the height of the university’s tower. On this basis, he charged
that it was invalid to base a climatic comparison between forest and city on rainfall measurements from the Prague observatory, where windy conditions artificially reduced the amount of precipitation recorded.66 On this basis, Purkyne
argued that the data being collected to settle the forest-climate question was
virtually useless. His microclimatological perspective implicated all the observations that had thus far been cited as proof that forests increased rainfall.
More generally, Purkyne came to see that the spatial and temporal scales of
climatic phenomena are interdependent. A “local climate” is typically identifiable only in the short periods when winds are calm and little mixing of air
occurs; long-term average measurements partially conceal its existence. Thus
measurements of climate across time can be thrown off by variations in climate
across space. In order to establish directed climatic change, Purkyne realized
that it would be necessary to build a very dense network of observing stations,
evenly distributed in space, with instruments at a consistent height above the
ground. All existing networks were severely skewed to the distribution of human populations. The abiding lesson was that researchers needed to correct
for the variability of climate on the small scale, rather than comparing observations made at different heights and under different conditions of exposure
to sun and wind.67
At the same time, Purkyne also demanded a larger scale of analysis for the
forest-climate question, one that took into account the planetary and continental determinants of regional and local climates. Particularly effective in communicating this spatial argument were his large-format maps of global forest
cover. These were meant to demonstrate the dependence of rainfall above all
on wind patterns arising from the distribution of mountains and bodies of
water, rather than on plant cover.

The Forest-Climate Question 257

Indeed, Purkyne’s visuals proved far more compelling to his contemporaries than his dense prose. As he put it privately, “I was often treated hostilely
because I expressed an opinion that was diametrically opposed to that of the
elites. Only striking, mostly visual cartographic and graphical representations
finally helped to win something of a victory.”68 Although these graphics proved
impossible to reproduce for publication, his colleagues took care to describe
them. A report of a meeting of the Bohemian Forestry Society in 1879 noted
that Purkyne displayed
a large wall map of the entire earth, on which rainfall zones and amounts of
rainfall were indicated by means of hatching; and forests, steppes, and deserts by means of colors. He used it to show how, for northern continents, the
amount of rainfall diminishes from the ocean to the center [of the continent],
while the forest cover increases from the coast to the interior. . . . [He] pointed
further to the rain-free zones in the regions of the trade winds [in the tropics] . . . and demonstrated how little the rains fall in the regions where humidity
is produced.

Next he showed a map of North America, which illustrated how the distribution of rainfall depended on mountains, ocean currents, and sea and land
winds. Finally, he turned to maps of climatic “anomalies,” deviations from a
long-term average. In the case of a small area like Bohemia, he explained, it
was “much more difficult to represent clearly on a map the course of clouds
and dry winds,” but even here he could show that “frequently the eastern or
southern half of Bohemia behaves differently than the western or northern,
which depends only the dominance and extent of certain winds.”69 Purkyne
was teaching his audience to see climate as a dynamic problem that could only
be analyzed with regard to the global circulation of the atmosphere.
Purkyne also stressed the need to extend the temporal scale of analysis.
He used both historical documents and geological observations to demonstrate that rainfall patterns in Bohemia could not have changed substantially
in the past millennium. According to the historical record, Bohemia had been
plagued by floods and droughts even when thickly forested. In short, in order
to assess the forest-climate question, it was necessary “to follow the distribution of forests and steppes in all parts of the world, then the climate of
individual lands and the causes of local variations of climate, to illuminate
the general meteorological laws and the modifications of them due to mountains and the extent of land and ocean in individual countries,” as well as
to collect “all known historical facts.” On the basis of evidence of all these

258

Chapter Nine

kinds, Purkyne arrived at a wholly original interpretation of the forest-climate
question.70
The essence of his argument was that talk of climate change hid far wider
and more deeply rooted problems. Regions said to be suffering from climate
change were often, in fact, afflicted with a wholesale socioeconomic and ecological crisis. In many cases, the woes attributed to climate change were the
result of “a misguided choice of agricultural specialization and of settlement
location, and an over-use of existing vegetation through over-population and
over-loading with cattle, etc.”71 Purkyne insisted that it was dangerously reductive to treat reforestation as a cure-all for problems that were fundamentally
socioeconomic in origin. He pointed to the example of France under Napoleon III, where the state had seized on reforestation as the one-size-fits-all
solution to social ills, with the backing of scientists like Becquerel. The public
had been led to “hope for future salvation from a large-scale afforestation,
which is unfeasible without a modification of the demographic and economic
circumstances, and any real redress will only be delayed, and the public and
government misled to sit with their hands in their laps, instead of working with
their heads and hands.” He went so far as to blame a “superstitious” faith in the
power of forests for the absence of other forms of state support— measures that
might actually be effective against disasters, like building levies or relocating
homes to less vulnerable areas. Purkyne concluded that the question of reforestation “could not be decided in general; these are questions of an entirely
local nature.”72 In this way, already in the early 1870s, Purkyne became the first
scientist to make a case for rescaling the forest-climate question.

Swimming against the Current in Bohemia
Purkyne’s position was, to say the least, a surprising one for a faculty member
at a forestry academy. The forestry profession at the time stood firm behind
the principle that forests brought climatic benefits. As Purkyne would learn
the hard way, skepticism brought few rewards in this branch of science. In
letters to his colleague George Engelmann, a German-émigré botanist in Saint
Louis, Missouri, Purkyne painted himself as a martyr to empiricism: “I do not
deceive myself. My manner of swimming always against the current will win
me no friends— at least not for ten or twenty years, when it will be too late.”73
Privately, Purkyne attributed his iconoclastic ways to the influence of a man
known to his followers as the democratizer of German science. The naturalist
Otto Volger was a radical democrat and German nationalist who had fled to
Switzerland to escape prosecution in the aftermath of 1848. A decade later, he

The Forest-Climate Question 259

became the founder of the Free German Foundation for Science, Art, and Public Education (Freie Deutsche Hochstift fur Wissenschaften, Kunste und allgemeine Bildung, or FDH), a Frankfurt-based institute aiming to bring natural
knowledge to the public and to counteract the fragmentation of the sciences.
Volger presented himself as a disciple of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe— less
the Goethe of Werther and Faust than the Goethe of the Farbenlehre: the brazen naturalist laying siege to the fortress of Newtonian color theory. (Purkyne’s
father, Jan Evangelista Purkyne, had also been a great admirer of Goethe and
an ally in the construction of a “subjective” theory of color.) It was in this spirit
that Volger purchased Frankfurt’s Goethehaus and moved his institute into it.
To his opponents, Volger was known as a contrarian: an enemy of Plutonism
when it was the dominant theory in geology; a proponent of the fixity of species in the face of Darwnism. But to his admirers, Julius Hann among them,
Volger was a model of scientific integrity.74
It might appear ironic that Purkyne took Volger, a German nationalist, as
his hero. Yet nationalism for both Purkyne and Volger (and for many veterans
of 1848 in central Europe) had more to do with class than ethnicity: hostility
to the aristocracy was at the core of their identity. In practice, their nationalism
was closer to what we would call scientific internationalism, since it promoted
cooperation across the narrow political borders of post-Napoleonic central
Europe. On the occasion of the death of a mutual friend and fellow naturalist,
Purkyne wrote to Engelmann:
Good old Leonardi is dead. He possessed something all too rare in our time,
a deep feeling for friendship and a genuine striving for clarity in everything
concerning Nature. He saw before him only one Nature, not departments and
guilds. I am indebted to him, since I was in close contact with him from 1850
to 1860, and even if he could not convert me to Krause’s philosophy (for all
philosophy is utterly foreign to me), still I learned a great deal from him. In
particular, he introduced me to Volger, at which point I became a new man.
I learned that one must see and think for oneself in everything and that mere
scholarliness is of no help to a natural scientist. Much of Goethe’s spirit must
have remained among the Frankfurters, or perhaps Goethe himself was only a
favored incarnation of the Frankfurter Spirit.75

Purkyne thus aligned himself with Volger and Goethe, and with their tradition
of freethinking, public-spirited natural history. Purkyne would have the honor
of becoming a member of the FDH in 1881, just a year before his death.76 Perhaps it was a consolation to him at that lonely time.

260

Chapter Nine

Purkyne also faced a powerful rival in Bohemia. In 1873, the mathematician
František Josef Studnicka (1836– 1903), backed by several of the largest Bohemian landowners, began organizing his own network of ombrometric (rain
gauge) stations. Studnicka was five years younger than Purkyne, the son of a
schoolteacher, but he had achieved the kind of academic career that Purkyne
could only dream of. By thirty-five he was a full professor of mathematics at
Prague University. Purkyne could also have envied Studnicka’s success as a
popular science writer. He was the author of numerous books ranging across
the natural sciences and their history. Where Purkyne’s style tended toward
vigorous argumentation loaded with reams of evidence, Studnicka wrote in
a florid, politely antiquated style. Studnicka liked to say that natural science
could enhance rather than dispel the wonder of the natural world.77
Studnicka believed that the scientific study of the Czech lands could nourish a healthy patriotism. Tellingly, he contrasted a patriotism rooted in the appreciation of the natural landscape with a cosmopolitanism arising from “slavishness and egoism.” He also looked favorably on theories like those of Herder
and Ratzel that attributed “aspects of national and individual character” to
“geographical factors.”78 Purkyne, by contrast, took a more hard-headed attitude to what Czech speakers called vlastiveda (German, Heimatkunde, or
homeland study). So, for instance, in contributing an article on an expedition
to the Tatras for the third issue of ziva in 1853, Purkyne noted that Czechs
and Poles had taken to lauding the unparalleled beauty of the Carpathians,
while German tourists “declare this mountain range to be inaccessible, unattractive, without charm and without comforts.” The Germans were not wrong,
he admitted, “in that the most interesting spots do not always lie between
two inns. . . . The Carpathians have their special charm and their comforts,
also their inconveniences.”79 We can conclude that both men pursued natural
science as a vehicle for national self-consciousness and cultural progress, but
understood these ideals differently. In addition, from the early 1870s, Purkyne
increasingly pursued this national goal by writing in a Weltsprache for an international audience.
Though Studnicka believed Bohemia to be an unusually fertile land, he
concluded that its climate was fast deteriorating. “Our country belongs,” he
wrote, “even in its roots to the lands blessed and favorably formed, and so
nothing is needed but to try to maintain those conditions, and to improve them
in those cases where it is desirable and possible to improve them; in no way,
however, should they be worsened by inept human hands!” The vulnerability of nature to human destruction, intentional or otherwise, was a recurring
theme in Studnicka’s writings. “How mightily,” he wrote, “does weak man

The Forest-Climate Question 261

interfere with nature!” Extrapolating from effects he attributed to deforestation
in North America, Studnicka predicted a disastrous climatic shift in Europe’s
near future, which would rob Europeans of their global economic dominance,
and turn their continent into “the least hospitable corner of the world.”80
Although Studnicka relied heavily on regional comparisons, such as that
between Europe and North America, he assumed that climate could be analyzed province by province. He evaluated the data from his network without consideration of neighboring regions. This field of view is implicit in his
somewhat awkward definition of “the climatology of Bohemia” as “the field
of knowledge comprising the interpretation of phenomena occurring above
the surface of the earth, insofar as they do not diverge from the borders of our
patria.”81 This definition of climatology foreclosed the need to attend to the
circulation of the atmosphere beyond national borders. By contrast, Purkyne
urged scientists to track atmospheric phenomena across the entire surface of
the earth.
Equally important, Purkyne and Studnicka took opposing positions on the
imperial centralization of meteorology and climatology. Studnicka was critical
of the entire centralizing program begun by Karl Kreil in the 1840s. He charged
that Vienna’s intrusions were to blame for a decline in the number of Bohemian weather stations in operation. By contrast, he credited several of Bohemia’s large landowners, listing them by name, for supporting the proliferation
of observing stations within his provincial network.82 Meanwhile, Purkyne
looked directly to Vienna for patronage.

“Strike While the Iron Is Hot”
Purkyne refrained from publishing on the forest-climate question until the
early 1870s. In 1872, he was called on by the Bohemian Diet to investigate
the devastating floods in western Bohemia, and he included in the resulting
publication a brief comment denying the climatic influence typically attributed
to forests.83 The following year, at the World Exposition in Vienna, he exhibited a collection of large-format graphs displaying eight years of climatic
measurements.84 As he later recounted to Engelmann in Saint Louis: “My
meteorological studies have taken me a dreadful time, so that everything else
remained undone. I have put together the rain for all years from 1800– 1807 for
all observations in Germany according to differences . . . in order to prove, that
the change in weather from month to month and year to year with less or more
rain does not depend on local causes.”85 Repeatedly, Purkyne would complain
to Engelmann that this work was leaving him no time for his true passion, plant

262

Chapter Nine

physiology. But he could not give it up, “because it is a matter of deciding a
question that plays a role in legislation.”86
From his earliest publications in his father’s wide-ranging journal ziva,
Emanuel Purkyne had practiced writing about the natural sciences for a general
educated audience. As he would soon learn, writing for an expert audience in
German in the 1870s required very different skills than writing for a general
audience in Czech in the 1850s. In the context of the Czech “awakening,” it
was not necessary to present original research in order to justify publication.
It was enough if a text managed to extend the reach of the Czech language to
describe a wider range of natural phenomena. It was for this reason that loose
translations of foreign works were sometimes published as original research.87
These articles often took a meandering, colloquial form, with plenty of digressions linking natural to cultural history. With the increasing specialization and
professionalization of the sciences, however, scientists writing for an expert
audience in German were expected to present original research and to do so as
concisely as possible. As specialists had to wade through ever-growing numbers of scientific journals, novelty and brevity became the virtues by which
scientific writing was judged.
Purkyne began to appeal to scientists in Vienna to get his research on the
forest-climate question published. He started with Lorenz, earning goodwill
by reviewing Lorenz’s climatology textbook for a forestry journal. Soon he was
asking his Viennese contacts to put in a good word for him at the agricultural
ministry, since his situation at the forestry academy was becoming increasingly
uncomfortable. And perhaps they might be able to find a scholarship for his
son Ottokar.
How delighted this embattled botanist must have been to receive his first
reply from Julius Hann in August of 1873. Purkyne had sent him a manuscript
and requested that Hann communicate it to the Academy of Sciences. The
letter opened with the assurance that Hann was “for the most part in agreement with him.” To be sure, storms did not dump more rain on forested than
on unforested land. Too little attention was paid to the fact that any modification of climate by forests would depend on geographical conditions. On
the other hand, Purkyne’s attempt at a mechanical explanation of the origin
of storms made little sense to Hann. More important to Hann was the point
that the forest-climate debate tended to neglect the role of forests in regulating
water levels. Didn’t forests allow the soil to soak up rainwater and so help to
stave off flash floods? It was possible to read this initial letter as encouraging,
but Hann’s tone turned impatient over the following months. “Your article
is welcome,” he advised, “as long as it’s short.” Thereafter, Hann’s letters to

The Forest-Climate Question 263

Purkyne grew ever briefer. In 1877, when he declined to recommend an article
of Purkyne’s for publication, he pointed again to its insufficient “consolidation or concentration.” For a journal like that of the Austrian Meteorological
Society, which reported on “everything new in the field of meteorology,” Hann
advised Purkyne to condense his remarks to a single folio page.88
Purkyne turned next to Carl Jelinek, director of the ZAMG, in the hope
that Jelinek could help him land a teaching position in Prague. Jelinek replied in January 1874 that in this matter he was “regrettably the least influential
[einflussloseste] individual.” Jelinek had been forced to give up his position
at the ministry due to ill health, and in any case the ministry had little to do
with the decisions of the Polytechnical Institute in Prague. In practice, hiring
decisions were made independently by the Bohemian provincial council or
Landesausschuss. Jelinek subsequently expressed interest in his writings, but
reminded him of the obvious: “I cannot hide from you that you find yourself
in the minority.”89
Fortunately for Purkyne, he found far more cooperative patrons in Josef
Roman Lorenz von Liburnau and Josef Wessely. From the start, both men
assured Purkyne of their support. Lorenz agreed that the forest-climate question could only be settled by rigorous experimental research. The historical
evidence was inconclusive, since one could never be sure of the conditions
under which it had been produced. Wessely agreed that Purkyne’s own survey
of historical evidence demonstrated “how ridiculous it is to draw conclusions
about a steady or changing climate from weather records for a few years.”90
Lorenz would later call Purkyne’s measurements “far more valuable than parading around old chronicles.” The one point on which Lorenz politely took
issue (like Hann) was Purkyne’s neglect of the forest’s hydrological influence,
a matter he would emphasize in Wald, Klima, und Wasser. He agreed with
Purkyne that there was an urgent need for an experimental program, and he
dangled before him the possibility that Purkyne might become the “sous-chef ”
for Bohemia, including Moravia and Silesia. “There are so many questions to
answer in climatology and soil science that one could employ 10 Purkyne’s,
if one had them— and the money to do so!” Such an undertaking, however,
looked unlikely at present, given the recent parliamentary deliberations on the
ministry of agriculture’s budget. More to the point, perhaps, Lorenz feared
that Purkyne would face significant “prejudice” due to his “resolute” position
on the forest-climate question. “I often occupy myself with the thought of finally creating a more suitable post for you,” Lorenz consoled him. By a suitable
position, he explained that he meant one that would allow Purkyne to support
a family in Vienna, if not quite in a manner “befitting his class.” Again, Lorenz

264

Chapter Nine

stoked his hopes: “You’ll see, forest meteorology will soon be in full swing
over here.” It was true, Lorenz confided, that a certain “Count M.’s” aversion
to Purkyne would make the task no easier. Nonetheless, he hoped that the
outcome would be “a new role” for the beleaguered naturalist.91
Lorenz confided further that he was fighting for their position in Vienna.
It was a “seething, tumultuous” scene, with opponents like the “supposedly
enlightened” Simony, author of Protect the Forest! The fight was no different
than in Bohemia, except that it was verbal— “because I would have absolutely
no time to enter into it in writing now.”92 There is no doubt that Lorenz was
a busy man, but he was also savvy. His diplomatic skills had helped him rise
from provincial origins to a powerful position in the imperial administration.
Indeed, he found Purkyne’s outspokenness alarming. One had to proceed
with caution. Purkyne’s critique of Ebermayer, for instance, might find a home
in a prominent forestry journal, Lorenz reported after a conversation with its
editor— but only if it were “very tame.” Purkyne needed to learn the rules of
the game: where, how, and when to publish.
Wessely, despite the colorful insults he hurled at his opponents in private,
was no more of a risk-taker than Lorenz in public. As he told Purkyne in 1874,
“Your polemic strikes me as apt and effective.” But Purkyne would have to
tread a fine line, “so that prominent people who aren’t familiar with the facts
aren’t led to believe that the polemic is nothing but malice.” It was out of the
question for Wessely himself to take a public stand, given the state of his health.
But he urged Purkyne to do so and to do it fast, since legislators were then
at work on a revision to the forest law. “Strike while the iron is hot,” Wessely
advised him more than once.93
Lorenz agreed that timing was everything. He illustrated by means of his own
career. In Fiume, he had been “too proud and too concerned with completeness” to publish, so that for years he was passed over for professorships in favor
of men “who didn’t have one tenth of my accomplishments.” Hence his advice
to Purkyne: “If you want to be recognized for your work soon, don’t delay;
rather, fire it off one part at a time.” As he explained, “repeated smaller publications have more effect on the opinion of a broader public, concentrated larger
works more on specialized experts.” And the opinions of laypeople mattered
“often enough” for the “fate of professionals.” More to the point: “scholarly
works” would have “absolutely no influence” over the minister of agriculture.94
And so Lorenz and Wessely laid out the rules of the publishing game. Do
get the word out at the height of the debate, but avoid a polemical tone. Be concise, and keep details to the footnotes. Use the genre of the feuilleton to conceal
your identity when necessary. Longer, “specialized” articles would never find

The Forest-Climate Question 265

a home in a newspaper. Some of the forestry journals would take such a piece,
but “none of those professional journals has much of a circulation among the
public.” In general, writing for the press required more discretion. “One can
only write entirely independently and according to one’s own inclinations in
brochures; there is always all manner of caution to be taken in journals.”95 Wessely was especially frank with his criticisms of Purkyne’s manuscripts, though
he begged Purkyne not to take it the wrong way. A “lighter,” “less off-putting”
style was appropriate for the wider audience Purkyne needed to reach. He
was convinced that the writings of the Bohemian forester would “cause a sensation,” if he would only follow Wessely’s suggestions— which came at great
length and in excruciating detail, even as he professed to be a hands-off editor.
In the end, the nine installments of Purkyne’s “On the Forest and Water Question” took up nearly three hundred pages of Wessely’s journal.96
All this advice shows how wrong we would be to think of popular science
writing as a simple, mechanical act of “translation.” Wessely described it as a
way of “conceptualizing” as much as a style of writing; it was a habit of mind
that required years of training. The more one worked at it, the more it would
be ingrained in one’s “flesh and blood.”97
Linked to Wessely’s editorial advice were the guidelines he offered for the
conduct of a scientific dispute. In advance of the 1877 forestry congress, Wessely wrote to Purkyne to let him know that “his topic” was on the agenda. He
proposed a preliminary debate between Purkyne and one of his opponents
in order to “light a spark” among the conference attendees. In the event, the
spark caught fire, and soon it was blazing out of control in the forestry press.98
In the aftermath, Wessely wrote that “the so-called forest-question debate,
in which you are our scientific freedom fighter, has taken a very unfortunate
turn. . . . I am disgusted by the manner in which our opponents are conducting
the battle, as it neither serves their goal nor is it a noble approach.” Yet Wessely
was not prepared to devote the pages of his own journal to the dispute. In fact,
he argued that “this battle cannot and should not be fought out in detail in
writing.” It was better to “let the opponents howl as they like, and occasionally
launch a short but significant article, in which one sticks to the subject and
if necessary mentions the opponents in a crushing but entirely professional
way.” Having sparked a confrontation, Wessely was concerned to maintain for
himself and his journal an image of detached expertise.
Purkyne took all this advice graciously. He was optimistic that these wellplaced mentors would help his ideas get a fair hearing. He wrote to his friend
Engelmann in Saint Louis in 1878 to announce that he had attracted the attention of the agricultural ministry. He had even been invited to deliver a lecture

266

Chapter Nine

on his research in Vienna, and it had gone well. He had received “flattering
applause from great men, who, of course, understand nothing of the matter,”
and praise from “Dr. Hann,” which was “very dear” to him. More importantly,
he had received “the assurance of all the material resources for my studies,”
perhaps meaning funding for his station network. Best of all, from Purkyne’s
perspective, was that he could now turn back to other topics in forest botany.
And Lorenz had even promised to win for these other studies “the greatest
recognition and publicity,” if they would “bring honor to Austria.” Purkyne
saw before him the career of a genuinely “Austrian” scientist.99
There is little doubt that his patrons in Vienna prized him highly and hoped
to be of service. By a funny twist of fate, a letter has ended up among Purkyne’s
papers that was clearly not meant for his eyes, and which gives us a remarkably
candid view of Josef Wessely’s opinion of him. In May of 1878, after Purkyne’s
presentations in Vienna, Wessely wrote to an unknown correspondent, praising the Bohemian’s research and his “goodwill.” From Wessely’s perspective,
Purkyne’s tragic flaw lay in his inability to compose his ideas on paper in
a manner that a German-speaking public could digest. It was, Wessely suggested, a “truly Austrian affliction,” this utter dependence of the man of science on the affirmation of the public.
Lorenz, meanwhile, felt a weight of responsibility toward Purkyne. “The
trust that you have placed in me since we have become better acquainted distresses me in so far as I have still not been able to reward it with an effective
step towards the desired change in your position.” Lorenz hoped that the new
research program in experimental forestry would provide such an opportunity.
However, the friendly tone of their correspondence faltered in 1875. Purkyne
had innocently offered to let Lorenz publish some of his ideas under Lorenz’s
own name. In a tone that could easily be read as either offended or jesting,
Lorenz professed not to understand what Purkyne was suggesting; then he
declared himself offended. Purkyne sent an apology, and Lorenz accepted. But
a few months later, Lorenz revealed his intention to write something “more
comprehensive” on the issue. “Were I indeed to publish such a thing before
you,” he told Purkyne, “I would appear a plagiarist.”100
Yet publish first he did. Lorenz’s popular book Wald, Klima, und Wasser
appeared in 1878. Its arguments closely resembled those made by Purkyne
in the manuscripts he had shared with Lorenz and in his publications in relatively obscure Bohemian periodicals. Bizarrely, Lorenz’s book contains but
one fleeting reference to his correspondent in Weisswasser. It comes on page
184, in the context of a discussion of the unreliability of historical evidence of
climate change, and it records his first name as Emil, not Emanuel.

The Forest-Climate Question 267

The correspondence between Lorenz and Purkyne ends soon after. Three
years later, Purkyne suffered a fatal stroke at the age of fifty-one, a martyr to
his vision of scientific truth.101 For Purkyne, the fight over the forest-climate
question was in part about winning a measure of autonomy from the state and
the aristocracy— a form of independence that scientists in the German Empire
and the United States already took for granted by the 1870s. His story shows,
through his failure, what it took to climb to the perch of an imperial-royal
scientist. Purkyne remained a mere provincial.

“The Public Good”
Purkyne did find one other powerful if unlikely champion in Vienna. Georg
von Schönerer began his political career as a liberal representative to parliament from Lower Austria. Only after the expansion of the voting franchise in
1882 did he develop his signature platform: anti-Catholic, German nationalist,
and fiercely anti-Semitic. Today he is best known as the politician on whom
Hitler modeled himself.102 Who would have guessed that he was also a climate
skeptic?
In 1876, von Schönerer took to the floor of parliament to denounce recent
agitation in Bohemia on behalf of forest protection. He set himself up as the protector of small farmers and their right to develop their land as they saw fit. The
theory that deforestation degraded the climate was, he charged, a “dogma” that
had never been proven.103 “The influence of the forest on rainfall and climate
is, if present at all— which has not in the least been proven— so small indeed
that laws that would constrain forest owners extensively are certainly not justifiable.”104 On whose scientific authority did this budding German nationalist rely?
Ironically, a man whose name is indelibly associated with Czech nationalism.
Indeed, von Schönerer was so taken with Purkyne’s research that he responded in a long article for the northern Bohemian paper, the Leitmeritzer
Zeitung. Such an article was clearly a lightning rod in a region where a sustained drought had led to fierce agitation in favor of forest protection. The
editors printed it with a note endorsing discussion of this important question
“from various standpoints.” The most interesting response they received came
from a writer who identified himself as a “small farmer” and gave only his
initials. He argued that desiccation could not be dismissed as a myth, and he
appealed to the authority of collective memory.
You must be dependent on the yield of a few small plots of land; you must have
kept a lookout for a hearty rainfall day by day throughout the dry summer for

268

Chapter Nine

several years, in vain; you must have seen how the crop gradually withers and
the expected harvest shrivels to a minimum; you must have seen your favorite
fruit trees mourning with wilting leaves . . . and only then, over the long winter,
when there is little work in the barns and little to bring to market, will you come
to the conclusion, that it has grown much drier than it used to be.

Then, suddenly, the writer’s tone changed.
And yet, automatically, the question also looms: will it continue this way, or
even grow worse? What is the cause? Is there no remedy? I am neither a scientific hero nor a Methusalem who could speak from a century of experience, but
only an entirely ordinary small farmer. I want to entrust the solution to these
questions to experts, in the hope that those who, with their trove of knowledge,
have so often lent a hand to agriculture, will also be of assistance to redress this
calamity, if it is at all possible.

Here the writer delimited the sphere of his knowledge and of his uncertainty.
He was sure that the climate had grown drier in recent years, but he could
not be sure of the longer-term trend, nor of the cause of this change. In this
exchange, we can see how the process of scaling played out as a negotiation
between collective memory and expert knowledge.
It was on this fertile ground that Lorenz’s 1878 Wald, Klima, und Wasser
fell and flourished. Thereafter, a proposed revision to the imperial forest law,
drafted in 1878, failed to be brought up for debate in the Reichsrat. When the
floods of 1881 renewed the controversy, Emperor Franz Josef appointed a commission to consider proposals to strengthen the imperial forest law. Among the
fifteen commissioners were five university experts (including Eduard Suess),
seven large landowners, one attorney, and two civil servants. Eight of the fifteen
held aristocratic titles, and only four made their homes in the flood-stricken
lands, while nine came from primarily Slavic regions of the Monarchy— all undoubtedly results of the influence of the conservative primate minister, Count
Eduard von Taaffe. The commissioners were critical of proposed changes to
the law. They objected to the assumption that measures introduced for France
could be uncritically adopted for Austria. They were also critical of the proposals for failing to combine forest management with infrastructural protections
against floods into a single law.105 In the subsequent debate in parliament, one
speaker in particular signaled the changing tide. This was a Herr Neumayr,
age fifty-two, a farmer from Salzburg. Neumayr denied that the proposed law
protected the interests of small farmers. He attacked it as undemocratic, since

The Forest-Climate Question 269

it allowed for afforestation of privately owned land without the permission of
the owner, based solely on the advice of experts. At minimum, he urged, local
experts with genuinely practical experience should be consulted.106 This analysis was in keeping with the political critique of forest protection articulated
by Purkyne and later taken up by socialists like Otto Bauer and Walter Schiff.
These critics all charged that strict protective measures served the powerful
interests of large landowners, expert foresters, and the railways (the last of
which supported afforestation to prevent damaging floods and landslides).
They argued that forest regulation could best serve “the public good” by allowing for multiple uses. And they warned against allowing reforestation to
become the quick fix for problems that grew out of social inequality, not only
environmental neglect.107
No further protective legislation was passed at the imperial level. Indeed,
the Forest Law of 1852 was not supplanted in Austria until 1975. Instead, in
keeping with Lorenz’s analysis, the issue of reforestation was addressed administratively at lower levels of government. In 1884 and 1885, for instance,
Tyrol and Carniola each passed laws requiring afforestation as a means of flood
protection. After much negotiation in the crown land diets, the cost of these
measures was divided among the imperial state, the crown land, and the local
inhabitants, with the locals bearing no more than 5 percent of the burden.108
This result represented a compromise between conservation and development, and between provincial autonomy and imperial oversight.

Conclusion
The effect of these negotiations was to rescale the forest-climate question,
transforming it from a matter of imperial legislation into an issue for local action and international research. In order to provide a framework for research,
the imperial ministry of agriculture approved a “General Organizational and
Operational Plan for Experimental Forestry Stations” in 1886. The plan stipulated:
Forest-meteorological observations. Of the utmost importance is the principle
that those observations should be undertaken or continued that fill holes left
by the treatment of this subject in other countries. Among these are two questions in particular:
a) “How does the moisture of the air within and over the forest canopy
behave in comparison to the moisture of the air of unforested surfaces at the
same elevation?” The answer to this problem will furnish the most important

270 Chapter Nine

material for deciding the question of the influence of the forest on the humidity
of the atmosphere.
b) “How does the forest affect the climate of its surroundings and how far
does this effect reach?” Here, of course, is to be included not only the moisture of the air as in a), but also the temperature, the frequency and amount of
rainfall, and the strength of the winds.109

This proposal stood at the vanguard of a rising international trend: European
and North American governments were just then beginning to assume responsibility for the investigation of the environmental impacts of human activities,
as inquiries into river pollution and urban smoke pollution attest.110 Lorenz,
the author of the proposal, argued that Austria-Hungary was uniquely positioned for experimental studies of the forest-climate question, due to the variety of climatic conditions within its borders.111 Three experimental stations
were established: one in Lower Austria, one in eastern Galicia near the Russian border, and one in the Carpathian foothills. This research confirmed that
the climate inside a forest was moister and its temperature range less extreme
than on unforested land nearby, but it failed to find a climatic effect beyond
the forest’s border. On the basis of this research, Lorenz’s collaborator Franz
Eckert, director of the forestry school in Aggsbach, Lower Austria, argued
that the forest-climate question had, at last, been solved. The climatic effect of
the forest had previously been “greatly overestimated,” and forest protection
had been guided by “motives of a non-climatological nature.” Forests could
not influence the surrounding climate directly by means of radiation or conduction, but only indirectly and dynamically— that is, by “the mediation of
air currents.” It was necessary to distinguish in this respect “between local air
currents coming from the surface vegetation, and the general air currents that
mediate this influence.”112 In this analysis, Eckert was following the schema
of dynamic climatology and the scaling practices of imperial-royal science.
From a comparative perspective, it is not surprising that Austria failed
to pass a stricter imperial forest law. Studies of the German Empire and the
United States suggest that centralized state environmental regulation was not
a viable option elsewhere in this period. In the case of smoke pollution, for
instance, a Prussian abatement law of 1848 was rarely enforced (much like the
Austrian forest law passed four years later). Most policy makers of the nineteenth century seem to have assumed that smoke abatement was the responsibility of cities, not states.113 Likewise, in the case of river pollution (whether
household or industrial), regulation was left up to municipalities. These, not
surprisingly, were happy to overlook waste that collected downstream from

The Forest-Climate Question 271

them. City planners explained that rivers themselves could remove the threat
of pollution through a natural process of self-cleansing (Selbstreinigung).
Rarely was it asked how far downstream of the source of pollution one had to
be to benefit from this effect.114
In fact, one of the first studies to investigate the spatial dimensions of river
pollution was carried out by hygienists at the University of Vienna. Among
them was Ernst Brezina, a collaborator of Wilhelm Schmidt’s on studies of
urban climatology. In 1903, Brezina borrowed a canoe from the imperial Danube Regulation Commission and sailed downstream from Vienna toward
Pressburg/Pozsony/Bratislava, observing and taking samples of the water as
he went. Between kilometer 10 and 20, the sewage of the Danube canal had
mixed with the fresh water of the river. By kilometer 31, the river showed
“traces” of pollution, but “one cannot speak of contaminated water in the
usual sense there, not even under unfavorable circumstances.”115 In this case,
as in the forest-climate debate, Habsburg scientists pressed a question of scale
that seems to have remained unexamined elsewhere.
Indeed, Habsburg scientists, foresters, statesmen, and farmers reformulated
the forest-climate question as a problem of scaling: a comparison between the
economic benefits of easing restrictions on forest use and the climatic benefits
of tightening them. This was a paradigmatic dilemma of early environmental
politics, the type of trade-off between preservation and modernization that
Harriet Ritvo documents in her study of the controversy over the construction of the Thirlmere Reservoir in the 1870s. The difference in the case of the
forest-climate question was the degree of uncertainty attached to the environmentalist argument. No reliable quantitative measures of the regional impact
of deforestation existed. Indeed, even today, the question of the regional (as
opposed to global) climatic impact of deforestation continues to provoke debate. Today the question turns on the role of feedback mechanisms. Positive
feedbacks mean that even partial deforestation could push a region into a “permanently drier climate regime,” turning parts of the Amazon, for instance, into
dry savannah. On the other hand, feedbacks can also operate to restore the
original equilibrium: in some cases, deforestation on a smaller scale has been
shown to lead to more precipitation and more plant growth.116 Like Lorenz,
Purkyne, and their collaborators, scientists today stress the need for analysis
at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Otherwise, it may be impossible to distinguish spatial and temporal fluctuations of a local climate from progressive
climate change.117
What did humans know in the nineteenth century of their potential to
transform the earth’s climate? Fabien Locher and Jean-Baptiste Fressoz are

272

Chapter Nine

right to question the assumption, implicit in the idea of the Anthropocene,
that awareness of anthropogenic climate change dawned all at once in the late
twentieth century.118 Before we attribute knowledge to past societies, however,
we need to consider whether existing evidence met their own standards of
inference. As this chapter has shown, many of the leading nineteenth-century
experts in climatology judged the data incomplete and equivocal. Certainly,
there was no evidence that deforestation had a climatic effect that was irreversible or global. Indeed, there could not have been, because available series
of consistent instrumental measurements covered at most a few decades, and
because the infrastructure necessary to “make global data,” in Paul Edwards’s
terms, was only in the earliest stages of construction.119 Before judging these
nineteenth-century scientists for their failure to speak out against anthropogenic climate change, we should consider the dilemma that confronted them.
Advocate for tighter forest protection on the basis of shaky evidence? Or allow rural populations a chance at economic development, an opportunity to
even out the vast social inequality that was feudalism’s legacy to east-central
Europe? It is the historian’s responsibility to convey the complexity of the
choices they faced.
By reconstructing this debate and its legal resolution, we have been able to
follow a process of social scaling. The resolution of the forest-climate debate
represented a novel conceptualization of climate as a matter of the “public
good.” As we have seen, Austrian law contained a contradiction: it assumed
that the removal of woodlands degraded the surrounding atmosphere, even as
it treated the atmosphere as a boundless and therefore unregulated resource.
Dynamic climatology offered a way out of this confusion. On one hand, dynamic climatology showed climate to be a planetary system, uninterpretable
at the local scale without reference to the general circulation. On the other
hand, dynamic climatology defined the degree to which climate was a local
phenomenon, according to the degree of mixing of the air.
Thus the global climate was not a material fact waiting to be discovered.
To see this, it helps to recognize that the “global” of late nineteenth-century
climatology was not that of twenty-first-century climate science. The global
data of the nineteenth century was two-dimensional instead of three, confined to the earth’s surface; and it was constructed by pen-and-paper interpolation and theorization from first principles, not from satellite images and
computer simulations. Yet the history of the forest-climate question shows
that the global scale of climate in this nineteenth-century sense was not just a
technical achievement; it was equally the social product of negotiation between
expert opinion and common sense. What’s more, the global climate was not

The Forest-Climate Question 273

the sole result of this process. Just as crucial, as the second half of this chapter
has confirmed, was the local scale of climate that emerged from this debate.
To conclude, we might return to Freud’s analogy between the draining of
swamps and the taming of the unconscious. The nineteenth-century experience of environmental transformations like swamp drainage and deforestation
may well have had a tinge of the uncanny. A parching drought or a devastating flood brought Freud’s contemporaries face to face with forces that were
not altogether natural, in that natural science could neither predict nor explain them. To those who believed that they were civilized by virtue of having
mastered brute nature, such uncontrollable forces were not unlike visitations
from the underworld. As Amitav Ghosh has written of anthropogenic climate
change today, “uncanny” comes closer than any other word to “expressing the
strangeness of what is unfolding around us.”120

Chapter 10

The Floral Archive
The historian has rarely lived through the events of past times that he describes. He has
not seen them with his own eyes; rather, he describes them on the basis of the documents at hand, whether these are the yellowed leaves of old codices and parchments, or
the brown fossil leaves in the coal shales, or the green leaves of the living plant world.
Anton Kerner von Marilaun, 18791

Among all the sophisticated new tools introduced in the nineteenth century
for scaling the climate— for understanding the weather of the here and now in
relation to large-scale, long-term processes— none proved quite so effective as
nature’s own climatic indicators: plants. Along with rocks and fossils, plants
were objects that made climate change visible and palpable. But unlike rocks
and fossils, whose transformations were invisible on the time scale of a human
life, living plants functioned to bridge the temporal scales of human history
and geohistory. Flowers and fruits were climatic indicators that spoke to nearly
all the senses at once. Not only did they speak of climatic relationships that
spanned vast gaps of space and time; they did so in ways that nonscientists
could easily grasp. Today, botany rarely figures in genealogies of our knowledge of the earth’s climatic history, which focus on discoveries in geology and
atmospheric chemistry. Yet the study of plants had a unique potential in the
late nineteenth century to connect concern over the forest-climate question
to the scientific project of reconstructing the variability of climate in the geological past.2
Nineteenth-century scientists had great respect for plants as climatic measuring instruments and as clues to the health benefits of a local climate. To be
sure, plants weren’t much use for taking readings of individual meteorological
elements like temperature or air pressure. Rather, vegetation measured the
combination of factors most relevant to that most immediate of purposes, life.
Researchers noted that no measuring instrument yet invented “was affected by
these influences in quite the same way as plants.” In the 1780s, the Bohemian
naturalist Thaddäus/Tadeaš Haenke meticulously recorded the locations of

The Floral Archive

275

plants in the mountains between Bohemia and Galicia. Haenke’s example was
an inspiration to Alexander von Humboldt, who reviewed Haenke’s book in
1791, praising his method of classifying plants according to vegetation type and
location over Linnaeus’s binomial system. It was here that Humboldt made
the crucial observation that Haenke had provided the world with “a vegetable thermometer.”3 Thirty years later, Humboldt began publishing exquisite
cross-sectional maps that correlated vegetation type with altitude. He likened
the changes in vegetation as one ascends a mountain to those encountered
when traveling from a temperate to a polar region. These maps made famous
Haenke’s method for using plants to delineate climatic zones. It soon became
a commonplace among naturalists that “everywhere the plant world is a reflection of the local climate.”4
And yet a plant’s relationship to the local climate was too complex for the
analogy to a measuring instrument to hold strictly. As the forest-climate question implied, it was necessary to consider not only the influence of the climate
on the plant, but also the influence of the plant on the climate. In addition,
generalizing about these influences was tricky. The enterprise of phenology
was challenged by the difficulty of pinpointing the moment at which any given
vegetative change occurred. Seasonal responses varied across small spaces and
even from plant to plant. Those willing to grant subjectivity to vegetation even
termed these responses “subjective,” arguing that “plants as individuals are
not all of the same disposition.”5
Thus, by the middle of the nineteenth century, naturalists commonly recognized plants as indicators of the climate of the land in which they grew. What
was novel was the idea of using plants to gauge the climates of the past. At
the time, geologists were still a couple of decades short of reaching a consensus that a major shift in climate had occurred before the advent of recorded
history. Some, though not all, were convinced that there had been a period
approximately twenty thousand years earlier when much of the now temperate
regions of the earth were covered in thick sheets of ice. Only recently had some
naturalists come to understand elements of familiar landscapes as evidence of
this Ice Age. Sediments known as “drift” were reinterpreted as glacial deposits,
while the seemingly randomly placed rocks known as “erratic boulders” were
said to have been transported by the former ice sheets. The Habsburg geological survey, however, ruled out the Ice Age theory, as did most British geologists,
following Lyell.6 It took a good twenty years for the theory’s proponents to
win their case. The 1870s saw the completion of a global survey of the evidence, including maps of the world’s remaining glaciers and measurements of
sea levels.

276

Chapter Ten

In the 1850s, then, the study of past climate was still a contentious field,
riddled with problems of interpretation. It was not easy to reconcile the apparent stability of the earth’s climate in the present with a theory positing such
a radical shift in climate in the relatively recent past. Some of this work was
accomplished not by physicists or geologists but by botanists. It was in part
the achievement of a network of researchers, professional and amateur, that
spanned the Habsburg Monarchy and beyond.

T h e I m p e r i a l - R o ya l B o ta n i s t
The network was spearheaded by the visionary naturalist Anton Kerner von
Marilaun (1831– 98). According to Kerner’s biographer, the Jewish botanical artist and writer Ernst Moritz Kronfeld, it was Kerner’s lifelong intention to write
a complete flora of Austria-Hungary; all his other research was preparation for
that undertaking. He taught scientists and nonscientists alike how to view the
Habsburg territory through the lens of plant geography. For this he came to be
known in Austria as “our Humboldt.”7 He also created the first floristic map of
the Monarchy and authored the chapter on botany for the “natural-scientific
overview” volume of the Kronprinzenwerk. The Plant Life of the Danube Lands
(1863) inspired a new generation of Habsburg botanists, while its elegant prose
was excerpted in school readers.8 What’s more, the terminology Kerner introduced to classify central Europe’s vegetation remained in place long after his
death, and it was often applied to plants throughout the European continent.
Kerner is occasionally cited today as an originator of the concept of the
plant association and thus a founder of the field of plant “sociology,” a cornerstone of modern ecology. In his own day, Kerner’s achievements in the study
of plant breeding brought him the admiration of Charles Darwin, who cited
Kerner’s attention to “various small, and apparently quite unimportant, details
of structure,” which constituted “most wonderful adaptations for various purposes.”9 However, Kerner also deserves to be recognized for his contributions
to climatology. Notably, his son, Fritz Kerner von Marilaun, who collaborated
closely with his father, went on to become one of the first experts in the new
field of paleoclimatology.10 Today, as climate modelers search for ways to make
their predictions vivid to a general audience, Kerner should also be remembered for his talent for the communication of science in visual and literary
form. He built on a growing demand for popular botanical literature at the
time, evident in German-language magazines like Gartenlaube, Bonplandia,
and Flora. Kerner skillfully employed artistic images and poetic text. He also
took an ethnographic interest in the role of the plant world in the folk cultures

The Floral Archive

277

F i g u r e 3 3 . Portrait of Anton Kerner von Marilaun (1831– 98), by Julius Viktor Berger.

of central Europe. Through painting and lyrical prose, he taught the public to
see a vegetative landscape as an indicator of a changing climate.
Kerner was born in the Wachau Valley of Lower Austria, roughly halfway
between the plains of Hungary and the Austrian Alps (see figure 34). His
father was a high-level administrator for the powerful Schönborn family, and
the Kerner family lived in the Schönborn castle in Mautern. The setting was
rich in well-preserved art historical treasures; indeed, the Krems district would
provide the subject for one of the first art topographical surveys to be published by the imperial monument commission in Vienna.11 Anton’s brother
Josef shared his love of the natural world, though Josef pursued a career in
law and botanized only as a hobby.12 In one of his earliest publications, Anton
described the landscape of the Wachau as “a romantic forest valley, in which
the most diverse flowering plants can be found densely packed in a narrow
space.”13 This fascination with the diversity of the vegetation of the Wachau
Valley would shape Kerner’s early botanical research, as he followed the trail
of familiar plants west to the heights of the Alps, east to the Hungarian steppe,

278

Chapter Ten

F i g u r e 3 4 . Watercolor of the Wachau Valley, by Anton Kerner, ca. 1852.

and south to the Adriatic coast. Throughout his life, he retained a sense of
himself as originating in a land straddling these sharply contrasting environments.14
Anton, following his father’s wishes, enrolled as a student at the medical
faculty of the University of Vienna, the preeiminent medical school in Europe
at the time. There he studied the latest scientific medicine with luminaries
like the physiologist Ernst Brucke and the pathologist Karl von Rokitansky.
Alongside his medical courses he enrolled in Franz Unger’s class on “the history of plants,” which must have had a powerful effect on him. By 1851 Kerner
was reporting on his own botanical research to the newly formed ZoologicalBotanical Society in Vienna.15 Already in this earliest research, conducted in
the immediate aftermath of the 1848 revolutions, Kerner had begun to infuse
his botany with patriotic overtones. Having discovered in the Wachau a type
of fern previously known only in Bohemia and Moravia and one native to the
Italian Alps, Kerner took these as “evidence . . . of how rich and inexhaustible
the flora of our beautiful fatherland is.”16
Meanwhile, Kerner’s commitment to a career in medicine was shaken by
the cholera outbreak of 1855, in the face of which physicians seemed helpless.17
His teacher Unger had previously made the switch from medicine to botany,
and now Kerner was ready to do the same. In 1855 he passed the examinations to become a Realschule teacher in chemistry and natural history. His first

The Floral Archive

279

posting was to an imperial high school in Ofen (Hungarian, Buda; today part
of the city of Budapest). In 1860 he accepted a call to the University of Innsbruck and the directorship of the botanical garden there. Two years later he
married Maria Ebner von Rofenstein, the wellborn sister of a medical student
at Innsbruck. They moved to Vienna in 1878 so that Kerner could assume the
directorship of the imperial botanical garden. Emperor Franz Josef honored
him with the rank of Hofrat (court counselor) and ennobled him as Knight of
the Order of the Iron Crown and, two years before his death, awarded him the
Decoration of Honor for Art and Science.18 Kerner’s career thus led him from
Vienna to Hungary, to Tyrol, and back to Vienna. It can be seen as a continuous effort to produce a botanical history of the Habsburg lands. Yet it was
marked by a series of reorientations, as he tried and failed to fit the plant world
to the model of patriotic imperial histories of migration and cultural exchange.

T h e V a n i s h i n g L i f e o f t h e P u s z ta
In Hungary, Kerner was alert to the environmental transformations under way.
Rapid deforestation under Ottoman occupation had left the region prone to
both floods and droughts, and population growth further strained the land
and its resources.19 Kerner noted, for instance, that places with “birch” in
their name no longer contained any birches. “In a half century the romantic
life of the puszta will have vanished, along with the vegetation that originally
covered the ground of the steppe.”20 In particular, he was drawn into public
debate over the climatic effects of swamp drainage in Hungary, over a decade
before the forest-climate question swept through Austria. In a series of articles
for the Wiener Zeitung in 1859, Kerner described the history of land reclamation in Hungary, including what he labeled the premier hydrological project
of European history: the regulation of the Theiss in the 1840s to drain three
hundred square miles of wetlands.21 With his medical training, Kerner brought
to this topic a concern with the atmospheric conditions conducive to organic
growth. Like most naturalists of his day, he attributed a moderating influence
to swamps similar to that of forests. By collecting and evaporating moisture,
swamps could temper the sudden swings between hot and cold characteristic
of a steppe environment.
His contribution was to insert a new perspective into this debate, the perspective of plant geography. At first, as he admitted, his specialty must have
seemed remote from the public’s concerns. Indeed, Kerner had the impression
that the majority of Austrian foresters had nothing but disdain for natural science, an opinion that Emanuel Purkyne might have seconded.22 What plant

280

Chapter Ten

geography offered in this case was the tool of “local vegetation lines” (örtliche
Vegetationslinien). Addressing the Zoological-Botanical Society in Vienna in
1859, Kerner had to define the meaning of this term.23 In contrast to the “principal vegetation line,” which marked the region in which a given plant could be
found at all, the local vegetation line marked the internal boundary between a
smaller area in which a given plant was common and an area in which it was
rare. As Kerner later explained, he thought of local vegetation lines as analogous to meteorological isolines; both were techniques for “making vivid” the
distribution of climatic conditions.24
As he tried to make sense of the effects of modernization in Hungary,
analogies to other parts of the Monarchy came to mind. Kerner likened the
boundaries of forest growth in the Hungarian plains to the upper limit to
forests in the Alps. Drawing on newly available meteorological observations
from the ZAMG’s network, he pointed out that these two sets of boundaries
resulted from the same effect: the limited duration of the growing season in
each climate. Tall trees require at least a three-month growing season. In the
Alps, these limits were set by nighttime frosts in the spring and fall, whereas in
Hungary they resulted from the shortage of water at the height of the summer
drought.25 The point was that forests could only grow in certain environments,
and only there would it be possible to improve the climate by planting trees.
Thus Kerner insisted that haphazard afforestation would bring no benefits.
Implicit in this judgment was the recognition that vegetation and climate
exist in a reciprocal relationship. Already in the 1860s, he warned that damage from deforestation, drainage, and other human interventions (Bodenumgestaltungen) was irreversible; where it had occurred, the dream of reforestation was futile. Such efforts would benefit the empire only as signs of the
danger of wanton deforestation.26
Essential to this argument were the analogies Kerner drew among Austria’s
varied “forestless” landscapes.27 Implicitly recalling Humboldt’s analogy between the climatic effects of increasing altitude and increasing latitude, Kerner
arranged seven types of landscapes found in Austria-Hungary in a progression
from glacial peaks to “barren desert.” All had in common that they were used
primarily for pasture. Then, drawing on his personal measurements over eight
years, he presented a preliminary table of the variation in the upper tree line
across the Monarchy, showing that its height was lower in more northern regions and those closer to sea level.28
By these means, Kerner was pressing a new point of view on readers of
the popular German-language periodicals in which he published. First, he
was training them to see ecological analogies between the most disparate en-

The Floral Archive

281

vironments of the empire. Namely, the environmental challenges of the high
mountains paralleled those of the steppe. What’s more, the environmental
comparison had social implications. The plight of the inhabitant of the Hungarian steppe was not so different from that of the Alpine peasant. If the second
deserved to reap the benefits of agricultural and technological development, so
did the first. But in both cases, development would have to proceed responsibly. Kerner urged measures to offset the ill consequences for the natural environment. This meant, above all, better irrigation in Hungary and reforestation
in the Alps.
In order to mitigate the climatic consequences of swamp drainage in Hungary, he recommended the construction of a “system of irrigation canals, running through the entire plain, and large artificial water reservoirs, which would
collect the flood waters and save them for later dry periods,” plus “watering
stations, which would see to the maximal distribution of the occasional rainfall over long time periods.”29 Kerner acknowledged that irrigation works in
Hungary would require “great sacrifices, much money and much time,” and
“the investment of large amounts of capital with a delayed return.” But the
work would be “of lasting value.” Urging his readers to consider the benefit
to future generations, he quoted the German poet Emanuel Geibel: “All we
need, we have been blessed to receive from our fathers; it falls to us to prepare
the ground for those who follow.”30
Implicitly, his transregional and multigenerational perspective suggested
that these tasks were in part the responsibility of the imperial government
in Vienna and not only a local matter. An undertaking on such a large scale
would have to originate with the imperial government. Kerner was arguing
that the Habsburg state had a duty to preserve the climate of the Hungarian
plain for the sake of its future citizens. Austria-Hungary was a “state of contrasts,” of “oppositions between east and west, north and south,” and “the
contest among contrasting elements has therefore become nearly unavoidable
on Austria’s territory.” Yet Kerner insisted that Austria had nothing to fear
from this competition. On the contrary, he wrote:
Even if a spark occasionally flashes from the friction between these oppositions, it is a wholly beneficial flame, which enlivens our nerves and keeps our
powers fresh and alive; it will never be allowed to erupt into a consuming flame.
Austria is a natural historical necessity. It is simultaneously a bulwark and the
mediating link between the eastern barbaric, homogeneous continental steppe
landscape and the western coastal landscapes, which, thanks to their highly
varied ground, have been fortunate to develop a rich cultural life.31

282

Chapter Ten

Here the young Kerner fell back on a facile opposition between the “barbaric”
east and the “cultured” west, along with a crude environmental determinism.
Yet his botanical research was already opening his eyes to a far more nuanced
geography of difference. Note his emphasis on the productivity of the encounter between East and West on Habsburg territory, which he likened to the
electrical (nervous) force generated by friction between unlike materials. He
too sought to naturalize this state’s diversity in terms of the dynamism of local
contrasts.
If the mood and tone that Kerner cultivated in his popular writing in these
years seem to anticipate those of the Kronprinzenwerk, the similarity is not
coincidental. In the 1870s, as Crown Prince Rudolf was planning that series, he
turned to Kerner for help. Rudolf intended to write the natural historical sections on the Danube floodplains and Vienna Woods himself. But he was better
versed in ornithology than botany, and so he wrote to Kerner to request his expert input. From that interaction came Rudolf ’s invitation to Kerner to author
the botanical chapter for the natural historical overview, “Austria-Hungary’s
Plant World,” one of five chapters in that volume. It was an assignment befitting Kerner’s ambitions. Through his studies of the flora of the Monarchy, he
was attempting to construct a vision of continuity across time and space that
could ground his appeals for the preservation of nature’s own monuments.
Although the concept of a “monument of nature” (Naturdenkmal) was not
yet in common use (chapter 2), it was implicit in Kerner’s writings. Already,
with the intrusion of modern farming and the railway, “the culture of the present has usurped the world of the Hungarian puszta.” Kerner suggested that
it was the duty of the imperial-royal scientist to advance modernization and,
at the same time, to salvage what was left of traditional natural-cultural landscapes, to “preserve in image and word these last vestiges of what is authentic.” These remains were still visible, he attested, but “we must make haste if
we want to record and pass on to posterity the images that are still displayed
there.”32
Kerner’s project shared much in common with the contemporaneous movement for architectural preservation launched in Vienna by Rudolf von Eitelberger in the early 1850s. Much as Kerner was motivated by concern for the
effects of human activities on plant life, so did von Eitelberger seek to preserve Austria’s art historical monuments in the face of urban and industrial
development. Both men were trying to teach the public to look at landscapes
throughout the Monarchy with a new appreciation for the marks of history.
Whether these took the form of the weathered stones of a medieval church
or the weathered bark of a stand of old-growth trees, their aesthetic effect

The Floral Archive

283

F i g u r e 3 5 . A moor in the Burgenland region of Hungary, painted by Anton Kerner, ca.
1855– 60.

should be similar. Their surfaces made visible the passage of time, the cycles
of growth and decay.33 The preservation movement linked such relics, natural
or man-made, to others strewn across the Habsburg lands, conjuring visions
of connectedness across space and time.

Plants Find Their Voice
It was a spring morning in 1855, six years after Austria’s defeat of the Hungarian revolutionaries, when Anton Kerner first set foot onto the puszta, the
Hungarian steppe.34 Kerner felt “powerfully drawn” (mächtig ergiffen) to this
landscape, to its “seemingly endless flat sea of green with its countless fields
for grazing, its isolated cottages and wells, with its marshes and slow-moving
streams always wearing the same garb.”35 (See figure 35 and plate 4.) During
his five years in Buda/Ofen, he returned again and again to study this fastchanging landscape before its defining features vanished forever. He mapped
geological strata, compiled phenological observations, and gathered ethnographic information on local agricultural practices and lifestyles.36
At first, however, Kerner found little sympathy for the local inhabitants. He
wrote home that he and his companions “were sincerely happy when we found
ourselves once again among Germans, with German manners and German as
their native tongue.”37 His early descriptions rehearsed stereotypes common
among commentators on Europe’s “East.” He lamented the “mismanagement”
(Unwirtschaft) of the land and the superstitious character of the Wallachians.38
His local guides showed no love for nature: “Indeed, not once did they find it

284

Chapter Ten

worth the trouble to gaze into the distance. With the exception of the nearest
path that he is to follow, the Romanian is indifferent to the whole terrain.”39 To
Kerner, it seemed obvious that the locals were deficient in aesthetic sensibility.
If the steppe was barren of artistic culture, Kerner suspected that this was
because it was (and, as he gradually came to believe, always had been) barren
of trees. Kerner took for granted that forests were a cradle of cultural creativity.
In this, he was in good company. By this time in the nineteenth century, Germans, Poles, Russians, and Lithuanians had all invented myths of origin that
traced their culture’s roots to one or another “primeval” forest.40 The gaze of
the steppe dweller, by contrast, struck Kerner as narrow and instrumental. Not
once did the locals lift their eyes to look off into the distance. He faulted them
for their insensibility to what Riegl would call Stimmung, the “mood” created
by viewing a landscape from afar.
A lonely twenty-four-year-old, Kerner turned to poetry. In “Meine Blumen,”
he wrote of the Alpine flowers that he had brought with him from Vienna and
planted on his windowsill, attributing to them his own sense of displacement
and observing their transformations with a physician’s eye. In “Saxifrage,” he
likened the plant’s “wan, sallow leaves” to the poet’s own face, “grown pallid
and wan.” Neither had acclimated to the “hot puszta.” This homesickness
needs to be read both as a Romantic trope and a medical diagnosis, part of
a long tradition of thinking about the psychic and physiological dependence
of organisms on their native climate. The poet promised that man and plant
would both recover “when we return home, leaves green and cheeks red.” In
“Gentiana” (another Alpine flower also to be found in low-lying meadows of
Europe and Asia), the poet imagines a drop of water on the plant’s leaf to be a
tear cried for its “sisters, who stand together on the mountains of the distant
homeland.” He begs the flower to stop its tears, or else he too will cry “like a
child” out of sympathy for the gentiana, his “dearest friend”: “Dearest to me
of all, far and wide / Of all my friends here in this strange land / We are bound
together by our sweet, shared home.”41 The metaphor of the homesick plant
came naturally to Kerner, aware as he was of the strong affinity of certain plants
for certain places.
As Kerner would later remark, plants play various roles in poetry. Beyond
serving as symbols or evoking the “characteristic mood” of a landscape, they
can function anthropomorphically, to voice human feelings.42 This was the
role that flowers played in the poems that the young Kerner composed in
Hungary. They expressed the poet’s own homesick longings.
Imagining himself in conversation with flowers, Kerner began to consider
how the voice of a plant might actually sound. Thus we have one poem from his

The Floral Archive

285

time in Hungary in which a plant “speaks” in a more literal sense. These verses
concern a linden tree, a species common in Lower Austria but rare in Hungary.
The poet listens to the sound of the wind in the linden’s leaves and hears voices
from afar: “sweet tales from the homeland, that lies so far away,— so long. And
above me rustling I hear a dear, familiar song.— Oh, sweet tones, pause a while,
why must you rush along!”43 With few familiar human voices to keep him
company, Kerner was learning to listen to nature in new ways.
Indeed, the imaginative exercise of giving plants their voice gradually reoriented Kerner’s perceptions of the steppe. Initially, he had found the local culture to be insensible to the beauty of the natural world, its art and architecture
void of references to plants. But exercising his poetic ear attuned him to the
aural culture of the steppe, its poetry and folk songs. He collected samples of
these verses and even tried his hand at translating them. And here, at last, he
found botanical motifs. The steppe had only appeared to him as an aesthetic
wasteland, because he hadn’t known what to look for. Or rather, he hadn’t
known what to listen for.
By the end of his five years in Hungary, he had reached a new interpretation of the culture of the steppe. In 1862, he presented his conclusions in Die
Gartenlaube, the German-speaking world’s most popular illustrated family
magazine. “What plant forms might the imagination attach itself to,” he asked,
in the absence of tall trees and enduring greenery? The author had scrutinized
the visual arts and architecture for answers to this question, but in vain. The
answers lay instead in music and poetry. In Hungarian folk songs, plants found
their voice.
Music translated the “elegiac” sounds of the Hungarian steppe. The cymbal imitated “the murmur and lisping of a thicket moving in the autumn wind”;
the fiddle mimicked the song of a warbler in the reeds. Kerner asked his readers to picture the fishermen on “the reedy banks of the Theiss,” who “look
out all day long over the water, and all that strikes their ears is the melancholy
rustling of the cane, and the plaintive, mournful song of the aquatic birds that
make their homes in the reeds.” The song of these fishermen “harmonizes perfectly with the surrounding natural world.” In Kerner’s judgment, Hungarian
lyrics likewise expressed a reverence for the natural world no less “exalted”
than the regard of the Swiss for their Alps. They recreated the Totaleindruck
or “holistic impression” of the steppe landscape (what Humboldt had called
Physiognomie). They also celebrated particular elements of that natural
world. Among these, naturally, were the roses, tulips, lilacs, and other ornamental flowers that had been brought to Hungary from the east. What interested Kerner more was the poetic attention lavished on native plants, like the

286

Chapter Ten

tribulus and evening primrose (the latter actually native to North America),
both hardy flowering plants adapted to the soil and dry climate of the puszta.
More surprising to western European readers would have been the popularity
in Hungarian poetry of a lowly species of grass Arvaleaanyhaj (Stipa pennata,
Waisenmädchenhaar or “orphan girl’s hair”), so called because of its “whispy,
feathery white awn.” It was a species that could be found in isolated spots
throughout southern Europe, west to the Rhine and north to southern Sweden.44 But Kerner insisted that it was only “at home” in steppe regions, namely,
in southern Russia and Hungary, where it was “authentically characteristic
of the vegetation,” essential to the “physiognomy of the landscape.” Kerner
likened the role of Stipa pennata in Hungarian poetry to that of the Alpenrose
(Rhododendron ferrugineum, snow-rose) in the lyrics of the Alpine world. As
an example, he offered his own German translation of the opening stanza of
one Hungarian folk song. Rendered into English, the verse might read, “I festooned my hat with orphan-girl’s-hair / I chose an orphan girl to be my wife /
The first I plucked on the wide steppe / and in the village I found my mate for
life.” The illustration that accompanied the article, based on one of Kerner’s
watercolors, showed Stipa pennata as part of a typical Pflanzengruppe or plant
community of the puszta, its tendrils blowing in the wind very much like long,
loose hair (see figure 36).45
By the end of his stay in Hungary, Kerner had rejected his earlier characterization of eastern Europe’s landscapes as monotonous. “The inhabitant of
the Alföld, who loves his homeland exactly as the Swiss loves his Alps, knows
how to reclaim [abgewinnen] inspiration from the plain in abundance, which
he exalts in his poetry and develops into images and metaphor. A mountain
miner’s son, upon first stepping onto the desolate, unvarying plain, is seized
by a feeling of loneliness and isolation. But the man of the puszta feels himself
elevated and elated by the view.”46 He now saw floral diversity all through
Europe, matched by human cultures to appreciate it.

The Plant Life of the Danube Lands
In Das Pflanzenleben der Donauländer (1863), Kerner recreated his encounter
with the Hungarian steppe in the register of allegory. The book as a whole
was skewed toward regions of the Monarchy that Kerner knew well, yet which
had received relatively little scientific attention. Eleven chapters dealt with
Hungary; four with the Carpathians along the Hungarian-Transylvanian border; four with southern Bohemia, Moravia, and Lower Austria; and six with
the Alps, specifically northern Tyrol. He opened the section on Hungary by

The Floral Archive

287

F i g u r e 3 6 . Stipa pennata, watercolor by Anton Kerner, ca. 1860. This archival watercolor
captures better than his published engraving the sheen that gives the grass an almost liquid look.

emphasizing how strange the steppe must appear to a first-time traveler from
“western Europe,” who would “feel himself transplanted to an entirely new
world.” Kerner set out to impart this sense of displacement by literary means.
He described the illusions to which one fell prey on the great plain. A shimmer
on the horizon, for instance, could falsely lure the observer by creating the appearance of distant hills (see figure 37). A meadow might appear to be a forest,
a farmhouse, a castle. Kerner dutifully provided an explanation: the hot soil
heated low-lying air unevenly, causing wavelike motions that distorted distant
objects. No sooner had he cleared that up, however, than he moved on to
further illusions and distortions. He recounted an encounter with betyars, the
Hungarian term for highwaymen, only to reveal that it was a dream, in which
the betyars quickly transformed into water sprites. Even in broad daylight and
apart from the distorting effects of the atmosphere, the steppe could be highly
disorienting. “With the uniformity of the surrounding world, and the absence

288

Chapter Ten

F i g u r e 3 7 . Délibab (fata morgana) on the Alföld, by Paul Vago, 1891.

of all reference points, it seemed impossible to me for one to orient oneself
here. And I marveled in astonishment at my guide’s knowledge of the area.”47
As we have seen in earlier chapters, experiences of being lost were viscerally important to the work of scaling. Accounts of ballooning or being lost
in a snowstorm or a forest signaled the need to reorient oneself in space and
time, to look for new measures of distance and proximity. For the visitor from
“western Europe,” the steppe demanded such a reorientation, for distance
was not what it appeared. Kerner drove home this point by quoting a hymn to
the landscape of the plains by the Hungarian nationalist poet Sandor Petőfi,
who died in the revolutionary warfare of 1848– 49. In lines written in 1844 and
famous to Hungarians by the 1850s, Petőfi had attested that the celebrated
mountain landscape of the Carpathians left him unmoved compared to the
vision of the puszta, his native land. In a recent English translation:
What are you to me, land of the grim Carpathians,
For all your romantic wild-pine forest? . . . 
My home and my world are there,
In the Alföld, flat as the sea,
From its prison my soul soars like an eagle,
When the infinity of the plains I see.48

The Floral Archive

289

Kerner’s lyrical German translation chose to emphasize the Unendlichkeit
(infinity) of the steppe by placing it at the end of the line. His point was that
the view across the plains commands just as wide a perspective as the view
from a mountaintop. The effect is not necessarily sublime; perhaps it is better
described as the experience of reverence that Riegl would term Stimmung,
though he would associate it instead with alpine and ocean panoramas. When
looking for a vantage point from which to paint an overview of the “fatherland,” German-Austrian writers tended to choose a view from a peak in the
Lower Austrian hills or from the tower of Saint Stephen’s. Kerner used Petőfi’s
poem to make the point that there was more than one perspective from which
to gain a comprehensive view of the Monarchy— a point that we have already
seen made by Stifter and Kreil in these years. On the other hand, Kerner went
on to close this preface with a far more predictable overview: an outlook from a
hill outside Vienna, taking in the “near and far” of the Habsburgs’ dominions.
Nonetheless, by beginning with Petőfi, Kerner had reminded the reader that
the imperial traveler need not set out from Vienna in order to acquire a proper
sense of scale. As Petőfi’s made clear in “Az Alföld,” his love for the steppe had
also prepared him to appreciate the “proud mountains,” even if they did not
speak to his “heart.”

Good Species and Bad
Kerner’s years in Hungary also proved crucial for his understanding of the
diversity of plant life. Much as Joseph Hooker and Alfred Russell Wallace were
doing in Britain, Kerner began to question the concept of a “typical” species.49
When he had taken up the study of botany as a youth, he had been taught to
collect what were termed “good species,” meaning plants that were clearly
distinguishable from each other according to an authoritative list of traits. The
goal was to find ideal-type specimens for each species, while all other samples
could be left behind in the field. When Kerner arrived in Hungary, however,
he found himself at a loss. “For a long time I couldn’t get my bearings. Nearly
all the plants had a somewhat altered appearance and nearly all diverged from
those that I had come to know in my western homeland as the typical ‘good’
species.” He went on to describe this predicament in the language of scaling:
“So I saw that the Hungarian flora, measured against the ruler I had brought
with me from Vienna [mit meinem von Wien mitgebrachten Massstabe gemessen],
were in fact composed primarily of ‘bad’ species.” “So I had landed in quite a
bad society,” he joked, poking fun both at traditional botanists and at stereotypes of backward Hungarians.50

290

Chapter Ten

Kerner also began to notice that the same name was often used for different
species in different regions. The tree referred to as Schwarzföhre (black pine),
for instance, was really three different species of tree, one found in Transylvania and the Banat; another in the Vienna basin and parts of Galicia, Croatia,
Dalmatia, and Bosnia; and the third in the border region between Bosnia and
Montenegro.51 Similarly, the undersides of the leaves of the flowering plant
known as primula had but the lightest covering of fluff in Lower Austria, a
velvety gray layer in Hungary, and a white felt in Transylvania. And so Kerner
began to hold on to “bad species,” instead of throwing them away.
In this way, his travels eventually supplied him with specimens that he
could arrange in a morphological series, such that plants next to each other
were self-evidently of the same species, while the ones at each end were utterly
unlike— so unlike, in fact, that Kerner never would have guessed they were
related, if he hadn’t found the specimens in between.
These experiences convinced Kerner that “the great majority of our classifications are merely artificial. . . . In most cases there could be no speaking of
sharp divides between types traditionally regarded as species; and, in general,
there were no species at all in the sense in which they were customarily understood.” Kerner still believed that the classification of species served important
purposes, but the definition of species would have to be modified. The new
definition would need to take account of geographic distribution and not only
morphology.
Here we have a striking illustration of how the structure and ideology of the
Habsburg Empire set different incentives for the sciences than did overseas
empires. Britain’s chief botanist at this time, Joseph Hooker, insisted that his
metropolitan perspective allowed him to see commonality where collectors
in the colonies saw difference. He was the preeminent lumper.52 Kerner, on
the other hand, was primarily a splitter. He repeatedly took it upon himself to
show that specimens grouped as members of the same species should be recognized as distinct, because they were found in geographically separate areas.
Kerner himself argued that he might never have had these insights if he had
worked in a state other than Austria. To illustrate, he offered a parable about a
botanist from one or another country of western Europe, a man who “trusted
authority,” whom he referred to as Simplicissimus. Simplicissimus decides to
travel to Austria, “the land of contrasts, which encompasses such completely
different vegetation regions,” in order to study the unique characteristics of
different floral regions. To his great disappointment, however, all he finds are
“bad species,” useless versions of those already listed in his books. “‘An odd
flora,’ Simplicissimus thinks once again, ‘in which so many typical plants are

The Floral Archive

291

only bad species or even worse than bad species.’”53 Kerner himself had been
a Simplicissimus until his stay in Hungary. It was there, he implied, that he had
truly learned to see and appreciate the variety of the natural world.

Relics of Another Age
At the end of his 1863 survey of the “plant life of the Danube lands,” Kerner
proposed to illustrate what he called, borrowing a term from linguistics, the
“genetic [i.e., historical] relationship” among the plant formations described
in earlier chapters.54 The site that would make this relationship visible was
a riverbank in the Alps. This bank was distinguished by its tumultuous geological history: avalanches and floods had repeatedly churned the layers of
earth and created new surfaces for plants to settle. Kerner’s description of
this process may be the earliest account of what ecologists later came to call
succession: the process by which one plant formation prepares the ground
for its successors.55 Not only did he posit this sequence of events; he went
on to estimate the time it must have taken. To do so, he used the azaleas that
bloomed briefly in early spring as a tool of temporal scaling. He compared
“the extraordinarily large mass of humus” in which the azaleas grew to “the
size of the plant and the short length of its annual growing season.” In this
way, he estimated that this 1.5 foot layer of humus would have taken at least a
thousand years to form. The azalea groups were the capstones of this process,
and Kerner concluded that they would endure and spread unless disturbed
by man or natural disasters.56
But where would they spread? How did climatic factors demarcate the
geographical range of Alpine vegetation? In lower-lying regions with higher
humidity (perhaps a shady spot where snowfall was late to melt, or near the
spray from a waterfall), one could find plant formations similar to those at
much-higher altitudes. In some such cases, one could assume that seeds or
whole plants had been transported down the mountainside by streams. However, when Kerner came upon isolated stands of Alpine flora farther from the
high peaks, he found it harder to imagine how they had arrived. These groups
appeared to be in the throes of “extinction,” and he noted that much of the
Alpine vegetation was “retreating . . . towards the moister region higher in the
Alps.” All this, he had no doubt, was “connected to the reduction in moisture
that has followed in historical times from the clear-cutting of forests, from the
draining of swamps and countless other incursions on the primordial state of
our lands.” Kerner was highlighting a robust form of empirical evidence for
the destructive impact of human activity on the plant world: vegetation lines.

292

Chapter Ten

Emphasizing the reciprocal influence of man, plants, and climate, he speculated that the climate of the northern and eastern Alps must have been more
“coastal” in an earlier epoch. Freshwater lakes would have been more plentiful,
and the “Alpine” plants would have covered far more of the low-lying land.
With the desiccation of the climate and the disappearance of many lakes, the
vegetation too had been transformed.
From that point of view, the riverbank he had described, with its tree
stumps and snow-roses, was a surviving microcosm of the Alpine landscape
in the “diluvial” age. Here was “the most authentic image” of the vegetation of
this region in an epoch before men’s eyes could appreciate its “splendor and
majesty.” “The imagination takes pleasure in forming for itself an image of this
long past age. We find ourselves transported to a cool, misty mountain land.”57
By means of unassuming plants, Kerner transported his reader deep into a past
that no human had ever seen. Yet this feat of temporal scaling was only a trial
run, tested on one small patch of a sprawling empire. Kerner’s ambition was
to tell a history of all of Austria-Hungary, and to do so with flowers.

“Our Humboldt”
Kerner found it ironic that botanists so often lavished description “in image
and word” on the flora of distant lands, while the plants in their own backyards
were left waiting for their chronicler.58 In this vein he quoted the end of Grillparzer’s “Entzauberung” (1823): “and my India lies in Moravia.” This line,
which would later appear in the Moravian volume of the Kronprinzenwerk,
could well have stood as a motto for Habsburg science in Kerner’s day. It was
in this spirit of discovery that Kerner set out to explore regions of the Monarchy still virtually unknown to the scientific community, such as the eastern
Carpathians, the Lower Austrian Waldviertel, and the southern high Alps. He
also inspired other Habsburg researchers to explore the Balkans, including
Bosnia, Albania, Bulgaria, and Montenegro.59
What was the purpose of such surveys? The Zoological-Botanical Society
promoted their practical value; they would answer “all the questions raised by
a rational agriculture as it strives to meet the high economic demands of our
day.”60 Botanical surveys were thus linked to the emerging field of economic
geography and the rational basis it provided for Habsburg governance.
At the same time, Habsburg plant geography was infused with the aesthetic
ideals of the new gesamtstaatlich or “whole-state” research programs. As we
have seen, it was in the 1850s that self-proclaimed “Austrian” schools of research formed as explicit challenges to the research programs of the nationalist

The Floral Archive

293

movements. Against arguments for the distinctiveness and antiquity of national
cultures, these “whole-state” disciplines collected evidence toward a history of
cultural exchange and ethnic mixing in the Habsburg lands. This was, initially,
the model that Kerner adopted for his vegetative history of Austria.
To this end, his illustrations aimed to capture local details as vividly as
possible. An illustrator with whom Kerner worked explained their modus operandi: “We both held to the principle that for the representation of the paysage
intime, which is particularly relevant to the botanist, it is necessary to adjust
the standpoint of the viewer appropriately, as well as the image’s borders or
else its contents.”61 The paysage intime was the nineteenth-century French
ideal of a naturalistic, unromanticized rural landscape. Applied to Kerner’s
work, the term referred to the unusual close-up point of view of many of his
illustrations, in which the smallest plants take center stage (see figure 35 and
plate 4). Indeed, Kerner argued that the smallest plants were often the most
significant for the representation of a landscape because of their proliferation.62
His overview of Austria-Hungary’s plant life would emerge from countless intimate landscapes.
Kerner explicitly likened his historical inquiry to that of a “curious” reader
of a political map, who might wonder how the present “political and national
borders” had come to be.63 Like von Czoernig in ethnography and von Eitelberger in art history, Kerner set out in the 1850s to explain the diversity of
vegetation across the empire in terms of a history of mixing and exchange. The
plants, however, seemed to tell a different story.

B o ta n i c a l M i g r a n t s
In 1860, as Kerner left Hungary behind for his new post at the University of
Innsbruck, he was already formulating an ambitious research program, one
that would add to plant geography the axis of time. Kerner once defined plant
geography as the discipline concerned with the spatial limits to the distribution of species, and with the local conditions of soil and climate that explained those boundaries. But his very next sentence made an extraordinary
leap— from a geography to a history of plants: “Likewise the displacement of
the vegetation lines, the advance of a given species in one or another direction,
the retreat and extinction of others in historical times are brought under observation, and thus stimulus given to a chronicle of plant migration.”64 This
move from spatiality to temporality was anything but obvious to Kerner’s contemporaries. Oddly, historians have overlooked Kerner’s distinctiveness in this
respect, routinely discussing him alongside contemporaries such as August

294

Chapter Ten

Grisebach, a more prominent plant geographer who denied the possibility of
climatic change.65 Clearly, we need to understand how and why Kerner broke
with that conviction.
Plant geographers of Kerner’s day were quite reflective about the spatial
scale on which they chose to work, even if they gave little thought to the temporal dimensions of their research. Supported by an army of amateur researchers
and low-paid artisans, they were producing successively finer-grained maps of
vegetation. In a process that Nils Guttler terms “zooming in,” these new representational practices transformed the Humboldtian plant geography of the
early nineteenth century into the plant ecology of the late nineteenth century.
Magnification made it possible to interpret spatial patterns in the distribution
of plants in terms of geographic conditions more specific than the gross generalizations of the Humboldtian era (such as “tropical” or “alpine”). “Zooming
in” thus enabled the ecological point of view: a precise understanding of the
environmental conditions necessary for life.66
Kerner, however, was the first to demonstrate another crucial consequence
of “zooming in”: it paved the way to a historical perspective on plant life. Questions about plant migration in response to shifting environmental conditions
could only be answered once vegetation had been mapped precisely enough
for distributional anomalies like oddly shaped tree lines to come into view. In
Kerner’s terms, a tree line “oscillates” with temporal variations in climate.
Kerner cited his teacher Franz Unger and the British naturalist Edward
Forbes as the first historians of the plant world. It was in reflecting on their
work that he began to formulate his own research program. Unger’s turn to
geohistory had come in the 1830s, likely as a result of an opportunity to inspect
plant fossils unearthed from a coal mine.67 He had realized that the present distribution of plants could not be explained only by present-day forces. Unger
was an evolutionist, but he did not believe that transmutation was the result of
the direct action of the environment. Rather, he favored the idealist theory of
the Bildungstrieb, a universal drive that created new species out of old, propelling the earth from one stage of organic life to the next, as if the plant kingdom
were a single, developing organism. He argued that the earth’s climate had
gradually cooled over the course of the planet’s history, and this explained the
greater frequency of plants with “tropical” characteristics in the deep past.68
Unger likened the study of botanical prehistory to the study of plant geography, but in effect he abandoned the spatial axis of analysis when he took up
the temporal one. That is, he described climatic conditions and characteristic vegetation in the past without consideration of geographical variation.
Also, unlike Kerner, Unger considered the earth’s climate in his own day to

The Floral Archive

295

be essentially a stable factor, aside from certain cosmic fluctuations and the
degrading effects of certain human activities. Thus natural fluctuations and
human interventions could cause a temporary advance or retreat of a plant’s
range, but not a permanent change. The future course of evolution would
be determined, he believed, not by environmental conditions but by nature’s
innate striving for perfection.69
In 1851, Unger published The Primeval World in Its Different Periods of
Formation. In it he conjured lost worlds with evocative texts and lavish illustrations. His desire, he said, was to “express only a possibility,” yet to “awaken in
men of liberal education a taste for the contemplation of these long-banished
periods, and cause them to look upon the Present as the result of this great
Past.”70 There is no space here to recount the shock with which Unger’s hypotheses were met in a cultural climate still reeling from the revolutions of
1848.71 More relevant is the inspiration that Kerner took from them. Although
Kerner broke with Unger’s idealism, he shared his mentor’s motivation to
synthesize empirical observations into a vivid, if speculative, and popularly
accessible account of the history of the plant world.
Just as inspiring to Kerner was the work of Edward Forbes (1815– 54), a
widely respected geologist and naturalist from the Isle of Man. Forbes had
attempted to explain the same phenomenon that perplexed Kerner’s Simplicissimus: the existence of similar but not identical species, growing under
analogous conditions yet at great removes from each other, such as “Scandinavian” plants in the highlands of the British Isles or “Spanish” plants in western
Ireland.72 Forbes attributed the distribution of flora in Britain to migrations of
plants from elsewhere in Europe. He did not suppose that their seeds had arrived borne by currents of air or sea. Rather, following Lyell, Forbes proposed
that Britain had once been linked to the European continent by a system of
land bridges, formed during a period of continental uplift. Foreign plants and
animals had settled on the British Isles during this epoch. As the land subsided,
the changing conditions had led to the “retirement” of older species and the
“introduction of such as were fitted for the more temperate climate.”73 Thus
Forbes adhered to the belief that species had been divinely created not once
and for all but in different locations and at different times in earth’s history.
Forbes died at the height of his career, aged thirty-nine. The following decade, his work came under attack by the Göttingen botanist August Grisebach.
Grisebach believed, like Forbes, in multiple centers of creation, but he drew
from this tenet quite a different conclusion. If each species had been designed
for its particular environment, there was no need to turn to theories of migration and environmental change in order to explain the spatial distribution of

296

Chapter Ten

plants. Grisebach did not stand alone, and it may be that the prevalence of
theories of multiple creation in this period explains the lack of interest on the
part of many European naturalists in tracking and explaining changes in the
spatial distribution of species over time.74
Grisebach went so far as to accuse Forbes of falsifying his evidence, and Anton Kerner stepped up to defend him. It is from this defense that the epigraph
to this chapter is drawn. Kerner argued that Forbes, in piecing together a history
of vegetation, had simply acted as any historian would. In defending Forbes,
Kerner ended up describing his own research program, which combined historical with experimental methods. He would evaluate the hypothesis of evolution by collecting historical and geological evidence of the prior distribution
of plants and by experimentally investigating their mechanisms of dispersal.

A N e t wo r k B l o o m s
The first step was to build a network of observers, for only on the basis of
close cooperation would it be possible to produce a uniform map of plant distribution. Karl Fritsch’s phenological network provided a foundation, as did
Kerner’s personal contacts. While conducting a botanical survey of Carniola,
he struck up a friendship with Josef Lorenz (chapter 9), later the president of
the Austrian Meteorological Society.75 He also initiated exchanges with lesserknown naturalists throughout central and southern Europe. One correspondent in Serbia replied in 1865 that he “gladly accepted” Kerner’s “friendly
invitation to enter into a botanical exchange.” Kerner’s popular writings also
contributed to the expansion of his network, as is evident from letters written
to him by fans who then became collectors.76
In 1871 Kerner convinced the editor of the Österreichische Botanische
Zeitschrift to add a new column to the journal: “Chronicle of Plant Migrations.” As Kerner explained, he often received plant specimens from regions
where the plants had “only recently begun to grow.” Often a collector would
attach a note about the history of the plant’s distribution, but few thought
such details to be worth publishing. Individually, observations like these were
of little value, but they could be tremendously informative if collected and
“interpreted from a synthetic perspective.”77 Kerner offered an example from
his own research. The previous summer he had received a specimen of Rudbeckia laciniata, a relative of daisies and sunflowers, from an estate owner in
Upper Austria. His correspondent remarked on the recent proliferation of
these flowers along the banks of the Aist, where they had been cultivated in
gardens attached to the mills and ironworks. Kerner decided to investigate.

The Floral Archive

297

This involved consulting “numerous” rare books from the seventeenth and
early eighteenth centuries, as well as dozens of nineteenth-century articles. He
managed to trace the flower from its native home in North America, through
its introduction to Europe in the seventeenth century and its cultivation in
gardens in Paris and the Low Countries, and finally to its “migration” out
of gardens and along riverbanks. In this way, the species had become “naturalized” (eingeburgert) in Europe. What surprised him was that he found no
references to Rudbeckia laciniata in the wild until the middle of the nineteenth
century— and then suddenly such references abounded. Where and when the
plant had first escaped the confines of gardens, Kerner could not say. But it
became clear that the species had turned wild only over the past two to three
decades and only in favorable locations.
Kerner’s plant geographical network was thus subtly but significantly different from earlier ones. To the task of tracking variations in vegetation across
space, he added that of tracking variations across time. He was after stories of
how certain plants and plant groups “migrate from place to place and conquer a
new field for themselves.” Of interest were the “climatic barriers” they encountered and could not “overcome,” and thus the emergence of “new vegetation
lines and upper limits.” Equally of interest were the plants that “do not participate in this movement,” those that might instead be “driven back,” and might
now be found “gradually dying out.”78 Kerner thus set out to collect the data for
an imperial history of migration, evolution, and extinction in the plant world.
This project gained new momentum when Kerner was named professor
of botany at the University of Vienna and director of the university’s botanical garden, founded by Maria Theresa in 1754. Kerner set the garden on a
new model. Convinced that modern botanical gardens must serve both experimental research and public instruction, he divided the garden into spaces
with different purposes. New greenhouses accommodated experiments, and a
portion of the garden was cordoned off from the public to serve research and
university instruction. The public area was divided in three, according to different organizational schemes: medicinal and economic uses, systematics, and
geographic origins. This last area was the most innovative part of the design
and was widely imitated elsewhere.79 Here the visitor could explore typical
plant groups from around the world, including displays of species from Japan,
China, Iran, the Himalayas, Siberia, the cape of southern Africa, Australia, and
Mexico. This area also introduced visitors to the geographical divisions that
Kerner had developed to characterize the flora of Austria-Hungary.
At the same time, Kerner began work on a comprehensive herbarium representing the full range of vegetation in Austria-Hungary. Each specimen was

298

Chapter Ten

labeled according to identifying characteristics, alternative names, and data
on the geographic conditions of the location in which it had been collected.
Kerner shared the editorial work with twenty-nine other botanists from across
the Monarchy, and they could count on regular contributions from approximately 150 members of his network.80 In 1881 Kerner published the first installment of the Flora exsiccata Austro-Hungarica, which was sent to gardens
around the world in exchange for their own catalogs.
Kerner’s transformation of the botanical garden and his construction of a
collecting network were geared to public outreach as well as research. As he
told the liberal daily Die Neue Freie Presse in 1886, the Flora exsiccata was
intended “to enliven and awaken interest for floristics in the widest circles of
the fatherland by including all those who take an interest in it and by means
of the widest possible distribution of the results of the collective work.” The
NFP’s report stressed that the network transcended divides of nation and
class. In easing national tensions, the paper suggested, Kerner’s project had
succeeded far better than the conservative administration of Minister von
Taaffe:
In order for this many-headed organism to function, for its energies not to
be diffused and for information to arrive appropriately selected and on time,
a well-designed and unified organization is naturally necessary. . . . The collaborators are distributed over all parts of the Monarchy. The most diverse
nations, confessions, and classes are represented among them. Here the German is joined on the peaceful field of scientific activity in harmony with the
Czech, the Pole, the Ruthenian, the Magyar, Croatian, and Italian. And what
still eludes Count Taaffe in the political realm, the reconciliation of the peoples
of this monarchy, has been accomplished here in miniature. Just how diverse
the social positions of the collaborators are can be shown by a survey of them
from this angle. Naturally, academics and clergymen make up the largest group.
To the first belong 27 collaborators, from university professors down to village
schoolteachers; the latter includes 13 collaborators, from the cardinal down to
a humble curate in the Tyrolean Alps or the pastor of a lonely valley in Transylvania. Alongside these are: 5 physicians, 8 civil servants of the most various
types, 3 pharmacists, 3 students, and 5 private citizens.81

In a period when other metropolitan naturalists downplayed the role of “local”
collectors,82 Kerner and his admirers celebrated the collaborative character of
Habsburg plant geography. His history of botanical migration was a project
custom made for the ideology of the supranational state.

The Floral Archive

299

Kerner’s network connected observers far removed in space; less obviously,
it also connected those observers to past and future generations. It aimed to recover observations hidden in historical sources and preserve new observations
for posterity. Kerner recognized that natural history needed intellectual continuity, and he prioritized this goal even in his personal life. Just as he showed
deep respect for his scientific forerunners, he took care to groom his successors. His son, daughter, and son-in-law all assisted him with the writing of his
late chef d’oeuvre, Das Pflanzenleben. His son, Fritz Kerner von Marilaun,
would carry on his father’s climatological research. Likewise, Kerner’s son-inlaw and former student, Richard Wettstein, would replace Kerner as professor
of botany at Vienna, paying frequent tribute to his memory.
Whether spanning across nations or generations, scientific cooperation
seemed to Kerner to require a certain ethical effort. In this respect, he echoed
the botanist Eduard Fenzl, first president of the Imperial-Royal ZoologicalBotanical Society, who had urged his colleagues to master their self-regard and
appreciate the seemingly “narrow” interests of their fellow Habsburg researchers. Becoming an imperial-royal scientist meant recalibrating the significance
of one’s local expertise in relation to a wider geographical field and a longer
history of knowledge. Kerner insisted that any contribution to botany could
be valuable, whether from a professional or an amateur, from a collector across
the world or one nearby. The key was to learn to think on a new scale:
In our age, which clings to the principle of the division of labor, it has almost
become a rule that each researcher progresses only along a single very narrow
path. However, narrowness too often has hubris as its consequence. Thus
the paths that others simultaneously tread are frequently arrogantly undervalued. In much the same way, with overconfidence in the infallibility of the
scientific results of the present, little value is attached to the work of earlier
times.83

What Kerner described here was a social process of scaling. In order to protect
against “narrowness” (Einseitigkeit) and “hubris” (Selbstuberhebung), the researcher would engage with a network of respected collaborators, recalibrating
his estimation of what was distant from him either in either space or time.

Foundlings of the Plant Kingdom
In his youthful travels through Hungary and Carniola in the 1850s and 1860s,
Kerner had paid particular attention to what he came to call “foundlings”

300

Chapter Ten

F i g u r e 3 8 . Detail of the “Floral Map of Austria-Hungary” (1888), by Anton Kerner von
Marilaun, showing the Wachau Valley and the border between Baltic flora and Pontic flora, with
Alpine flora at higher elevations.

(Findlinge). These were islands of plant associations far from their main population centers, such as high-altitude flowers like Alpine roses and edelweiss on
the low coastal mountains of Carniola, or Mediterranean plants like fig trees,
tulips, and peonies in Hungary. At that time, the historical explanation for such
anomalies seemed self-evident. These vegetative islands must have resulted
from the dispersion of seeds through human migration and trade, assisted by
the action of wind, water, and migrating animals.
Consider, for instance, Kerner’s explanation of the distribution of flowering plants in his native region of the Wachau Valley (see figure 38). In the
geographical terms that Kerner introduced in the 1860s but later replaced, the
Wachau represented the intersection of three distinct geographical domains:
herzynisch, alpin, and pannonisch. Hercynia referred to forested areas of central Europe and Pannonia to east-central and southeastern Europe; his use of
ancient toponyms handily avoided any reference to the political borders of his
own day. The Wachau was, for this reason, a particularly interesting field site:

The Floral Archive

301

When crossing the valley the image of the vegetation in many cool shady spots
reminds one of the flora of a valley of the foothills of the Alps. Further along, a
plant group of the hercynian region recalls to us the dry, sandy forests of pine and
spruce of the Bohemian-Moravian hills. And a few steps further perhaps we find
“the hair of orphan girls” blowing from a terrace of loess or encounter a citizen of
the pannonic floral realm in the shrubbery surrounding some white and turkey
oaks, reminding us of the far-off Hungarian plains. And so we come to the conclusion that we find ourselves on a very remarkable patch of ground with respect to
plant geography, on which three great central European plant regions converge.84

How had this remarkable variety come about? Kerner turned in part to historical evidence to find out. It seemed that the pannonic plants had shifted to the
west in the course of human history. Since the local rivers all flowed east, water
could not have carried “pannonic” seeds westward from Hungary. Human
trade must have been responsible. Thinking ethnographically, Kerner noted
that one pannonic species had long ago come to be used in the Wachau region
as a signpost for a “forbidden path,” as if recalling its foreign origin.
And yet human trade alone could not explain the present distribution.
Kerner found that other eastern species had arrived in the Wachau more recently. No corresponding eastward shift of western species had been observed,
making it unlikely that these newcomers were the result of livelier traffic between “East and West.” In manuscript notes from the 1860s, we see Kerner’s
observations of plant distribution in the Wachau. He was coming to suspect
the influence of climate change. Taking the climatic influence of forests as a
given, he inferred that deforestation was pushing the climate of the Wachau in
the direction of “continentality,” toward lower humidity and greater extremes
of heat and cold.85 Kerner understood himself to be tracking a shifting border
between Europe’s “East and West.” At this point, he was still relying on a crude
cultural geography as his template for botanical geography. He suspected that
this creeping line would eventually come to rest at the foot of the Alps: “and
just as this landscape once appeared as the border between the nations of west
and east, now it forms the western wall to eastern Europe’s vegetation.”
Well into the 1860s, Kerner thought of plants, like human colonists, as actively taking advantage of favorable climates and soils. Like Darwin, he emphasized “the individual organism’s capacity to migrate.”86 So, for instance,
the Mediterranean plants growing in Hungary appeared to Kerner as a living
memorial to the Ottoman conquest. When Moritz Wagner put forward similar
ideas in 1868, Kerner was among his more receptive readers. Wagner argued
that migration and isolation were the key factors enabling speciation. Without

302

Chapter Ten

a physical barrier to prevent interbreeding, hybrids would revert to the characteristics of the original species in future generations.87 Although Wagner
was quickly shouted down by the gatekeepers of evolutionary theory, Kerner
explored his ideas in an 1871 article, “Can Hybrids Become Species?”88 By this
time, however, Kerner had embarked on a remarkable series of experiments to
put the role of migration in speciation to the test.
Soon after his arrival in Innsbruck, he began to note morphological differences between plants growing in the valley and in the mountains. This suggested to him a way to verify the Lamarckian hypothesis. He replanted common flora of the valley in his high-altitude garden, then observed whether the
new environment produced heritable changes in the transplants. The results
were negative: most of the plants from lower-lying areas failed to reproduce
at all in the experimental gardens, but those that did showed no signs of the
inheritance of acquired characteristics. As late as 1866, Kerner was still advancing Lamarckian views in publication, but by 1869 he had come out in favor
of natural selection.89 In “The Dependence of the Plant Form on Climate and
Soil,” Kerner presented his observations on the spatial distribution of related
plant species. He had long wondered why the same name was applied to what
appeared to be different plants in different regions. Previously, he had assumed
that species transplanted to new environments were directly modified by local conditions and the new traits passed on to offspring. Having abandoned
the assumption that transmutation resulted from the direct action of the environment, he now suggested that speciation occurs when a variation allows
organisms to “fill a hole” near the periphery of the range of the original species.
However, his real interest lay not in the mechanism of heredity but in the
relationship between populations of living things and the changing environments to which they had to adapt. Thus Darwin’s theory mattered to Kerner
above all for its interpretation of sexual reproduction. By reproducing sexually, plants avoided the extremes of “species chaos” and “monotony.” In other
words, sex allowed a species to generate enough variations to weather environmental fluctuations, while keeping the range of variation narrow enough to
allow something identifiable as a species to stabilize. As Kerner put it in 1869,
it is a remarkable fact of nature that species are both variable and constant,
and this implies no contradiction. Crucially, “the ability to transform into new
species is not unlimited,” while “the constancy is only temporary.” Two aspects of this formulation are noteworthy. First, in the aggregate, the remarkable
characteristic of living things was their resiliency in the face of environmental
change. Second, the fact that the “constancy” of species is “merely temporary”
was a claim about the scale of observation: plant species appear fixed only on

The Floral Archive

303

the time scale of human experience. Plants had taught Kerner to measure time
according to a scale other than the human.90

T h e D y na m i c s o f P l a n t M i g r at i o n
The “migration” of plants had rarely been studied experimentally when
Kerner took up the problem in the 1860s. Naturalists tended to assume that
the present distribution of plants had resulted from the transport of seeds by
humans or animals on the move, by running water, or by air currents. In The
Origin of Species, Darwin had attested to the capacity of seeds to germinate
after such trials as being submerged in seawater, swallowed by a bird, or embedded in a beak, claw, excrement, or floating log. His evidence suggested
that plant seeds were hardy long-distance travelers. He was therefore inclined
to explain present-day distributions in terms of migration and to reject explanations that appealed to geographical changes such as the appearance and
disappearance of land bridges, as Forbes had proposed in 1846.91
Kerner too had long thought of plants as avid migrants, yet in the late 1860s,
he began to doubt this assumption. Like Darwin, Kerner had convinced himself experimentally that many types of seeds could survive passage through a
bird’s digestive system with their fertility intact. However, consideration of the
timing of seasonal migrations and of the preferred foods of migratory birds
made this an unlikely explanation for the presence of southern plant varieties
in the high Alps. Indeed, none of the fauna found in the high Alps were known
to live in distant regions. Nor could human traffic explain the presence of such
foreign plants in uninhabited areas.92 Meanwhile, by the 1870s, the younger
de Candolle had concluded that most species of seeds could not in fact survive water transport.93 With these possibilities eliminated, it seemed logical to
attribute plant migration to the action of winds. Kerner took up the challenge
of testing that hypothesis.
Doing so meant taking up the perspective of dynamic climatology as it was
then being developed at the ZAMG. Kerner was an enthusiastic participant in
the growth of atmospheric science in Austria in these years. Three of his research papers appeared in the Journal of the Austrian Society for Meteorology,
and he founded a weather station of the imperial observing network near his
summer home in Trins. His study of the variation in soil temperature with exposure was cited approvingly by Julius Hann in his textbook on climatology. Like
the best of the dynamic climatologists, Kerner insisted on the importance of observing atmospheric phenomena continuously as they unfolded in time. This
meant striking out at the critical moment, rather than relying on the scheduled

304

Chapter Ten

measurements of a permanent observing station. In the opinion of the physical
geographer Carl von Sonklar, who dealt extensively with questions of climate,
Kerner’s work was remarkable for “the thoroughness of the research . . . and
even more the all-around highly developed physical understanding of the author.”94 Kerner even designed an instrument to solve a problem at the heart
of the forest-climate debate: how to standardize the measurement of dew. Decades earlier, Karl Fritsch, director of the ZAMG’s phenological network, had
complained to Kerner that his dew measurements were “looking like a failure.”
Nowhere could he find reliable observations, and “still less am I able to say
how the amount of dew depends on variations in exposure and air currents.”95
Kerner’s drosometer filled this need. It used a thin leaf of aluminum to collect
dew, while the weight of the dew was measured by the displacement of water
within a thin pipe, which was calibrated both by absolute weight and by its
equivalent as a height of precipitation. One forestry journal judged that this
device had finally succeeded in producing “relatively inter-comparable data.”96
Kerner began his investigation of the large-scale mobility of plants with an
observation of botanical life on the smallest of scales. Imagine yourself in the
high Alps in the middle of a bright sunny day. Were you to take a rest in the
partial shade of an overhang, you might notice that the air, lit from the side, is
teeming with tiny seeds. Each of these seeds is equipped with miniscule hairs
or wings for gliding. Kerner attempted to estimate their number by catching
them in his hands. He found that an average of 280 seeds, some weighing as
little as 0.02 milligrams, passed through an area of roughly one square meter
per minute. The question that mattered to Kerner— the question critical to the
history of Alpine plants— was just how far such seeds could travel, once they
had hitched a ride on a mountain breeze.97
This was, first, a matter of empirical aerodynamics. Using a fan to produce
a controlled horizontal air current, he tested how far seeds and fruits of different types could glide. By far the most flight-worthy were those equipped
with what Kerner described as feathery parachutes; these did indeed seem
capable of covering vast distances and ascending to “extraordinary heights.”
Kerner admired the “marvelous structure of the appendage,” which optimized
the surface area of the seed in contact with the air relative to its weight. Just
as significant was the fact that this parachute was made of hairs rather than
a continuous membrane, achieving the same surface area with less weight. It
would seem that such seeds could indeed be carried far and wide by modest
winds. But was there evidence of such journeys?
For this purpose, Kerner judged, moraines provided “natural testing
grounds.” Within a few years of a glacier’s retreat, plants would begin to grow

The Floral Archive

305

here and there in the sand between rocks; after a decade or so, those pioneers
would have produced enough humus for a second generation of settlers to
move in.98 Therefore, where flowering plants could be found growing amid
the till left behind by a retreating glacier, it seemed safe to conclude that they
had arrived as seeds relatively recently. Still, there were no surprises among the
species Kerner found growing on the moraine, nor buried frozen in the glacier;
all were well represented in the surrounding valley. Nonetheless, Kerner considered the possibility that seeds from afar might arrive with “equatorial air
currents.” A southern wind might carry seeds as “a gift and a memento from
its warm homeland far away.”99 Notice that Kerner was still following Dove in
thinking of warm central European winds like sirocco and foehn as blowing
from tropical regions. And yet, remarkably, Kerner next proceeded to apply
his own thermodynamic considerations. In effect, he turned a problem of botanical geography into one of dynamic climatology.
Kerner noted that for a seed to be borne and remain aloft, it must remain
dry. A seed in moist air would drop quickly to the ground, as Kerner’s experiments demonstrated. But this situation could never obtain in reality, he argued.
It was ruled out, “always and necessarily,” by the laws of thermodynamics. Any
air current bearing a seed aloft would expand and cool as it rose, and its relative
humidity would increase accordingly. The seed would be lifted to a certain
vertical limit, and then it would be able to rise no further. That limit would vary
with the type of seed, the season, the time of day, and the topography. Kerner
estimated its maximum at five hundred to six hundred meters above the highest peaks, taking this to be the upper limit of a vertical air current, presumably
on the basis of experiments with kites. What’s more, Kerner observed that on
days with warm sun and low humidity— conditions conducive to generating
rising air currents and keeping a seed dry— the horizontal wind component
tended to be weak. So no matter how high the seed rose, it would land a relatively short distance away, easily confined by the towering peaks of the Alps.100
Kerner’s reasoning rested on painstaking observations of atmospheric conditions up and down the valley walls (see figure 39). From the 1850s into the
1880s, he filled dozens of notebooks with measurements of meteorological
elements, observations of clouds, and diagrams of wind directions. He even
invented his own method for detecting winds too light to turn a wind vane. It
used nothing more than a wax candle attached to a pole and matches. Once
extinguished, the candle’s smoke would mark a trail indicating the wind’s direction.
On the basis of this dynamic analysis, Kerner ruled out the possibility of
the “transport of airborne seeds across broad expanses of land and sea,” at

306

Chapter Ten

F i g u r e 3 9 . Example of Kerner’s unpublished notes on atmospheric dynamics, showing
the direction of airflow in a valley.

least in the Alps.101 Recent studies using dispersal and seed-bank analysis have
confirmed this finding.102 This conclusion had important consequences for
the curious phenomenon of “foundlings,” particularly the isolated occurrence
in the eastern Alps of plant communities ordinarily found far to the south.
Kerner had now rejected the idea that these seeds had been transported by
humans, animals, water, or air. There remained little doubt in his mind that
such outliers were instead “forgotten outposts of a former population that had
previously lived throughout the region.” He continued: “the fact that such
colonies of southern plants appear in several places in the eastern Alps leads to
the conclusion that a warmer climate reigned in the region of the eastern Alps
after the last Ice Age . . . but that later, due to a change in the climatic conditions, those species were restricted to more southern areas and only remained
at isolated, climatically highly favorable locations to the north.”103 In this way,
Kerner’s painstaking observations of winds in mountain valleys, combined
with his early grasp of atmospheric thermodynamics, convinced him that the
mobility of plants in mountainous areas was tightly constrained. For this reason, the present distribution of Alpine plants was a crucial clue to the climate
of the past. With plants to guide him, Kerner had succeeded in turning the
instruments of dynamic climatology— thermometer, barometer, hygrometer,
anemometer, candle, and kite— into tools of temporal scaling.

A History of Austria-Hungary in Flowers
Kerner published less frequently in the last decade of his life— not for lack
of energy, but because he was preoccupied with work on his popular magnum opus, Das Pflanzenleben, which appeared in two volumes in 1888– 90,
with a revised edition between 1896 and 1898, the year of his death. In the
1880s, he also made two final contributions to the floral history of AustriaHungary. First, building on his botanical overview for the Kronprinzenwerk,

The Floral Archive

307

he constructed a “Floral Map of Austria-Hungary” for the new PhysikalischeStatistische Handatlas (chapter 5). This was a visual synthesis of a lifetime of
research into the diversity of Habsburg vegetation. It portrayed the empire as
the site of the convergence of four floral realms (see plate 5). His final contribution, presented to the Austrian Academy of Sciences in 1888, took this map
into the fourth dimension.104
This exercise in temporal scaling began with the familiar problem of interpreting the occurrence of “foundlings” in the Austrian Alps, at the boundary
between the regions of Pontic and Mediterranean flora on his botanical map.
By 1888, Kerner had amassed a vast trove of empirical information to back his
claim that floral foundlings were signs of radical and relatively recent shifts in
climate. He had acquired more detailed evidence of present-day plant distributions in Austria-Hungary and other mountainous and steppe environments
in Eurasia, including Scandinavia, southern Russia, and the Himalayas. These
observations showed that Alpine flora grew well beyond the Alps: east into the
Carpathians, Caucasus, Altai, and Himalayas, north into Scandinavia, even
south to the Dinaric Alps, the Pyrenees, and the Balkans. How could this wide
dispersal be explained? Certainly not in a Humboldtian framework. Kerner
reminded his readers that Humboldt had posited the identity of Alpine and
Arctic flora, assuming a neat correspondence between latitudinal and altitudinal variation. Detailed surveys showed this was not the case. No, Kerner
insisted, the question was how specifically Alpine varieties had spread so far
and wide, and only a geohistorical explanation would suffice. Fortunately, he
had new evidence to draw on: plant and animal fossils, as well as recent geological discoveries such as that of Ice Age high-altitude bridges (anticlines)
between the Alps and Carpathians.
From there, he opened out to furnish a sweeping vision of the Habsburg
lands from the Ice Ages to his own day and into the future. The evidence
suggested that the present distribution of vegetation was due to an extended
period of warm, dry summers following the last Ice Age. It was then that the
Scandinavian and Alpine glaciers had begun their retreat from the plains of
central Europe. Seeking cooler conditions, some Arctic varieties would have
gradually migrated to higher elevations to the south, while some Alpine types
would have found refuge to the north. Migration in this sense meant an exceedingly slow shift of the distributional limits, not a colonizing expedition. The
presence of Alpine flowers in the Balkans was harder to explain, since there
was no geological evidence of glaciation there. Kerner suggested that these
species were in fact natives of mid-altitude regions that had moved upland
in the Alps as the climate warmed and the glaciers receded. Like most of his

308

Chapter Ten

contemporaries, Kerner mostly left aside the question of the cause of such a
“profound” climatic shift. He did, however, venture a hypothesis to account
for the regional change that most interested him: the separation of Pontic from
Mediterranean flora. Echoing a theory put forward by Eduard Bruckner at this
time, he suggested that it was due to geological “changes in the configuration
of the continent” around the Black and Caspian Seas, changes that had given
the eastern and southern parts of Eurasia distinctly different climates.105
In this way, Kerner arrived at a general theory of the response of vegetation to climate change in mountainous regions. In periods of cooling, plants
requiring a longer growing season would die out in the valley, making room
for vegetation from higher altitudes. Conversely, in a period of warming and
glacial retreat, plants from the valley would move up the mountainside. They
would arrive in stages, each community preparing the soil for the next. In the
case of the eastern Alps, these settlers would have come from the south and
east, that is, from the regions of Mediterranean and Pontic flora.
Those “homesick” plants had proved their value as scaling tools. They
afforded a vision of spatial and temporal continuity: from the eastern Alps
north to Scandinavia, east to the Eurasian steppe, south to the Balkans, and
from the last Ice Age into the present. “The present cannot be sharply marked
off from the warm period following the last great advance of the glaciers. The
transition was a very gradual one.”106
Looking ahead, Kerner saw no reason to believe that climatic conditions
would remain as they were at present. “If for once the constraints that restrain
plant migration at the boundary of high-altitude flora fall away or expand or
contract, then even these stable flora will again be in movement and flux.”107
Kerner spoke of the plant world as a Lager or “storehouse”— not in the traditional sense of a stock of resources for the satisfaction of human wants, but in
a new sense: that of a system equipped to adapt to a changing climate. He observed that mountains were endowed with such a wide variety of plant types,
whether sprouting or dormant, that they would always house suitable colonists
for lower altitudes, no matter how radically the valley should cool.108 In much
the same way, plant geneticists today speak of ecosystems like forests or coral
reefs as “storehouses” of biological diversity, transforming an anthropocentric
metaphor into a biocentric one.

With the Blessing of the Land
Kerner was an eloquent advocate for the role of imagination in scientific research. Even if it often led to error when allowed to “soar unanchored by

The Floral Archive

309

empirical observations,” imagination (Phantasie) was an essential “aid to research.”109 Indeed, Kerner’s experiments in scaling depended on his capacity
to imagine a temporality other than that of human life.
When Kerner was in his forties and had attained the rank of Hofrat, he and
his wife decided to have a summer cottage built near the Trins moraine in the
Gschnitz Valley in Tyrol. This is where they spent all the subsequent summers of their lives. Kerner’s son Fritz and son-in-law Richard Wettstein built
their own cottages nearby, and Kerner frequently hosted visiting international
scientists here. In this way, Trins became one of the most thoroughly studied
geobotanical field sites. Thanks to this historical tradition, it still serves today
as a benchmark for the climatic history of the eastern Alps.
In choosing this site, Kerner was already thinking of its historical significance. For it was here, in 1867, that he had discovered the Primula auricula,
the Alpine flower that Clusius had hunted in vain three centuries earlier. Kerner’s insights into the changing climate of the Alps might have given him a new
appreciation for this find. Clusius’s years in Vienna (1573– 88) coincided with
the start of a period of pronounced cooling in the Alps (1570– 1630). Perhaps
when Clusius came looking in the 1570s, the seeds of the auricula were already
frozen in a layer of ice. Kerner, on the other hand, was working in the warming
phase that followed the end of the Little Ice Age. The moraine near Kerner’s
summer home was deposited after the retreat of the Trins glacier some fifteen
thousand years ago, when much of the rest of the Alps was already ice free, and
it may be for that reason that it was home to plants not found elsewhere. The
glacier advanced again during the Little Ice Age, reaching its recent maximum
extent circa 1850. Evidence suggests that the hillside where Kerner made his
discovery had remained glaciated longer than surrounding peaks.110 According to recent research, it is possible for seeds of many Alpine plant species to
survive in a frozen state for long periods of time and remain germinable.111
Arriving in 1867, Kerner might well have found the auricula blooming in the
moraine for the first time in three centuries.
To mark the occasion of the completion of the summer cottage in 1874,
Kerner wrote a festive play. It was in the style of the Renaissance pageants in
which courtiers had been cast as features of the natural world. In this case, the
roles consisted entirely of rocks and plants. The play opens with the character
Flint reminiscing about the Ice Age, remarking on how much the landscape
has changed since then. Suddenly he hears a hammering and sees the glint of
an ax on the moraine. He turns to Larch (an evergreen) and Charlock (a flowering wild mustard) to ask who is “disturbing the peace of the valley?” Larch
informs him that a human couple arrived “two moons ago.” Charlock urges

310

Chapter Ten

Flint to let loose an avalanche and flood to scare these intruders off. Instead,
the characters begin to consider what manner of humans these are. As they
speculate on the couple’s intentions, we see how the work of climatological
research might appear from the perspective of the plant and mineral world.
“With rod and rule they began to measure, note, and sketch the contours of the
hill.” Then the humans “stretched themselves out comfortably on the ground,”
where the grasses eavesdrop on their conversation. In the end, the characters
conclude that the couple mean no harm. The stones and flowers bless Kerner
and his wife, wishing that they may take pleasure in the surroundings “until
their hair is the color of the mountain faces that encircle their beloved cottage.”112
This glimpse into Kerner’s personal life suggests how deeply his experiments in scaling were informed by his poetic imagination. By giving voice to
plants, once again, Kerner managed to juxtapose his personal experience of
aging with the time scale of geological change. The dialogue among Kerner’s
vegetal neighbors beautifully illustrates Suess’s dictum that nature must be
measured by man but not according to man. In this case, the result is a nonhuman perspective on the measurement process itself. Not only does it convey
the ephemerality and fragility of human life from the point of view of geological
forces and geological time. It also underscores how partial a view of the nonhuman world is captured by human measuring instruments.

Conclusion
Kerner’s achievement was, above all, to grasp that radical climatic shifts might
be a part of the earth’s future as well as its past, and to offer his contemporaries,
scientist and nonscientist alike, the tools to imagine how familiar living things
might react to a more or less radical shift in climate. Openly acknowledging
the uncertainties inherent in his method, he nonetheless presented a possible
future that was consistent with all known data. It was an imaginative act— that
Kerner freely admitted— but it was a vision grounded in vast empirical research and careful calculation.
Essential to Kerner’s botanical history were his practices of spatial and temporal scaling. Plants were tools for situating unfamiliar regions and distant epochs with respect to a nascent map of the Monarchy. Exotic vegetation became
a metric of distance, while familiar plants were signs of cultural proximity via
migration and exchange. At the same time, Kerner mined archives, libraries,
herbaria, and botanical gardens to situate his observations in relation to earlier scholarship. “Each of our theories has its history . . . and only narrow-

The Floral Archive

311

mindedness and learned foolishness [Gelehrtendunkel] can view and promote
the [scientific] laws of the present as infallible and immutable.”113 His finely
honed historical sensibility reflected in part his self-consciousness as heir to an
Austrian tradition of natural history, from the courts of Maximilian and Rudolf
to the reincarnation of the Vienna Botanical Garden under his own direction.
And yet Kerner’s capacity to discard old theories delineates the scope of
the imperial-royal scientist’s autonomy from Habsburg ideology. Although he
began his vegetative history of Austria on the model of other patriotic histories,
his meticulous empirical research eventually convinced him that this model
had to be modified to account for the precise distribution of the empire’s
diversity of plant life. The hypothesis of migration had to be qualified by the
evidence of dynamic climatology. Imperial history had to be rewritten as climate history.
Kerner recognized that these conclusions were of little interest to most botanists of his day, focused as they were on the cellular scale. But he felt sure that
times would change: “Even in science, fashions change. . . . And so there will
surely come an age that will better recognize the value” of these observations.
“For the recording of data that make it possible to follow the gradual changes
in vegetation, they will owe us the greatest thanks.”114

Chapter 11

Landscapes of Desire

In public, the imperial-royal scientist appeared confident in his ability to mediate between competing systems of measurement and valuation. In private,
however, this work was fraught with anxiety. When the young hero of Stifter’s
Nachsommer announces to his mentor, Risach, that he has learned the lesson
of the relativity of scale, the wise naturalist suggests that the lesson is not so
easily learned: “When there is a surfeit of wishes and desires in us, then we
listen only to these and cannot grasp the innocence of things outside us. Sadly,
we call them important when they are objects of our passions, and unimportant when they bear no relation to those passions, although the opposite may
often be true.” The hero reflects: “At that time I didn’t yet understand the full
meaning of these words. I was still too young and often listened only to my own
inner voice, not to the things around me.”1 Stifter’s prose, so far removed from
the ecstatic sublime of the Romantics, reads as an effort to teach the meaning of
Risach’s words. What might strike a modern reader as belabored descriptions
can be read as a lesson in the patient, sober, selfless observation of the material
world, the antidote to the narrator’s “surfeit of wishes and desires.”
The persona of the imperial-royal scientist represented at once a moral and
a physical ideal. Morally, it implied the subordination of local concerns to the
goals of “whole-state” research. Physically, it meant the acquisition, mile by
mile, of bodily knowledge of the diversity of the Austrian lands. Pursuit of this
ideal plunged many scientists into a tense struggle. In their travels around the
Habsburg lands, they were frequently beset by longings they did not know
how to satisfy, whether tempted by the exotic or lured by nostalgia for home.
Charged with distinguishing between things that were small yet significant,

Landscapes of Desire

313

and those that were truly petty, these scientists became tormented by their
liability to be distracted by irrelevant details or merely personal concerns. The
private side of scaling was the effort to mediate these conflicts.
The archival documents that give access to such private experiences are of
a kind that many historians of science would skip right past. They are legible
only with the greatest effort and might sooner be classified as poetry than science. Yet I will argue that any genuinely historical understanding of dynamic
climatology must confront the emotional turmoil that these scientists experienced as they reoriented their sense of near and far.
The theme of this final chapter, then, is desire. It is about men who experienced themselves as ruled by desire. In their hands, climatology took on a
role more commonly assigned to religion and acquired something of its ethical force. The science of climate became a tool for gauging the significance
of things apart from the fickle longings of body and soul. Here was a science
that would allow its practitioners to disentangle personal inclinations from
universal laws, local contingencies from general patterns. It would enable them
to right their own sense of proportion, so as to see clearly the significance of
those “small things” that truly mattered, while overlooking those that were
indeed petty. In this respect, the work of scaling was, in part, an attempt to
stabilize a masculine sexual identity that could support the social relations of
imperial-royal science.

T h e P r i va t e W o r k o f S c a l i n g
In the spring of 1856 the eighteen-year-old Julius Hann began to record “little
notes about experiences, intellectual and personal interests in the form of a
diary.” They were nothing more, he said, than “little nature sketches,” notes
on his readings and studies, and descriptions of “the changing character of
the landscape according to weather and season, which always left a deep impression on me.” They seemed to him in many parts “entirely meaningless and
petty.” He later considered destroying them, but he did not, because he had
come to value them as records of his personal development. Invoking a spatial
metaphor that recurs throughout his diaries, he wrote that personal memories
could free the mind at times when “our vision and efforts are lost in the minutia
of a shallow, flat environment.”
Retrospectively, Hann cast these diaries as a chronicle of his struggle to
adapt to the social world of science in the imperial capital, to rise to his professional “calling.” “It took repeated, painful struggles and experiences in order
to do away for the most part with the habits and training of this solitary and

314 Chapter Eleven

F i g u r e 4 0 . Photograph of Julius Hann (1839– 1921).

ostensibly self-sufficient way of life, and to be fit for truly, uniquely enriching and uplifting relationships with other people.” And so Hann decided to
preserve these books, and he justified this act with reference to the relativity
of scale:
Until recently I was of the opinion that it was best to throw my past away, once
I had the opportunity to measure [messen] it in its simplicity and triviality
against richer, finer lives. But that would have been a mistake. Each of us can
do no better to fulfill his duty, and for his own good, than to foster and develop
in good measure [maßvoll] what Nature gave him as his own. . . . And if it
appears quite small when compared to richer, stronger, more highly endowed
natures, it has its value in its place; it is one of the driving forces in the rich
unfolding of life.

What appeared small and merely personal might hold value when viewed from
an appropriate distance.2

Landscapes of Desire

315

Hann’s feelings of weakness may have reflected his social status. His father,
Josef Hann, the son of a craftsman, had risen to the position of caretaker of
Schloss Starhemberg, a sixteenth-century palace near Linz where Julius spent
his first nine years.3 This early setting remained vivid to him: he could recall
the quality of air and light, and even recounted an attempt to draw the estate
from memory.4 “I often have dreams of that time, spent entirely in the lap of
nature in the solitude of the estate I called home, in fields of flowers, and which
now, in memory, is but one unbroken springtime.”5 Josef lost his post in the
course of the revolutionary year of 1848, as a consequence of the reform of the
land-tenure system. He then received an imperial appointment as a magistrate
in nearby Kremsmunster. But he died two years later, in 1852, when Julius was
thirteen. The family spent the following year in Linz, where Julius attended his
first year of gymnasium. His instructor in natural history was Dominik Columbus, the first person to serve as meteorological observer in Linz at the station
newly founded by Karl Kreil, himself a native of Upper Austria. But Julius did
not remain in Linz for long. His mother had been left without a pension, and
in order to support herself she moved with her children to Kremsmunster,
where she opened a boarding house for students of the monastery’s gymnasium. The boarding house flourished, becoming a mainstay of student life into
the twentieth century. It was maintained by Julius’s beloved sister Anna after
his mother’s death in 1873. Meanwhile, Julius had the good fortune to find his
way to the Kremsmunster gymnasium. There he proved to be an unusually
earnest, eager, and attentive student.6
Hann had mixed feelings about monastic life. As he wrote in 1861, after
eight years of studies: “Corpus Christi.— These days interacting with the novices (some already priests) I clearly sensed the reverse side of monastery life:
rather awful gloominess, spiritual apathy— undoubtedly a consequence of the
miserable, uniform, intellectual and bodily lethargy-inducing life of strict isolation without stimulation and ventilation of the mind, grown musty. Five years
of this!” Although he was not attracted to the seclusion of a monk’s life, he was
drawn to the monastery’s Mathematical Tower. He befriended a priest by the
name of Gabriel Strasser, who was then an adjunct to the director of the observatory and a teacher of physics and mathematics at the gymnasium. Strasser
was the son of a miller, but his intellectual abilities had been recognized early
on by a village schoolteacher, making it possible for him to study at Kremsmunster. From 1873 until his death in 1882, he would serve as the observatory’s
director, and in that period he published extensively (in the yearbook of the
ZAMG and elsewhere) on meteorological observations made at the abbey.7
Hann admired Strasser and envied aspects of his career: “And so I still thought

316 Chapter Eleven

back then, if this could be endured, then I could probably be quite happy as
a priest. Particularly alluring to me was the prospect of a position like that of
Father Gabriel, which seemed to me from just about every angle to fulfill all of
my desires. I thought of Gabriel, equipped with aesthetic feeling and a great
depth of feeling and imagination— how could he not be happy there! Oh that
you would surely be, I thought!”
Hann was indeed a deeply spiritual if unorthodox youth. He addressed
his prayers not to God but to the natural world. In doing so, he echoed the
Benedictine trope of listening to the divine word with a “wide” heart. Thus
in his diary he apostrophized his natural surroundings: “Welcome me again
into your circle, spring and summer days! May you make my eyes more radiant, my spirit wider, my heart larger and stronger, that it will cast away all
the weight of sullen worries that rob one of time and mirth.”8 In a similar
vein, he addressed the atmosphere: “You fortifying, invigorating, purifying
forest air! Flow through me, cleanse me, purge from all that is dull, slack,
ailing.”9
It was in these years that Hann first read the great prose works that would
provide models for describing both his emotional life and the natural world.
He quoted long passages from Goethe, including the Italian Journey and The
Sorrows of Young Werther, which found echoes in his private accounts of his
inner states. His style also borrowed from Alexander von Humboldt, whose
Cosmos he read with fervent excitement in these years, and whose death, reported in the press, struck him with a “wondrous, shuddering feeling.”10 He
was inspired, too, by the ideal of scientific landscape painting proposed by
the Saxon physician and artist Gustav Carus. Carus foresaw a great future for
landscape art, christening the new genre of Erdleben (earth life, by analogy to
Stilleben or still life), which included above all paintings of atmospheric phenomena. Carus, a Romantic, understood landscape painting as a process of
uncovering the mystical aspects of nature. “How infinitely varied and delicate
are atmospheric phenomena! Whatever finds a resonance in the human breast;
processes of lightening and darkening, evolving and dissolving, building and
destroying: all this displays itself to our senses in the delicate forms of the
clouds.”11 In his diary, Hann quoted Carus on the potential for science and
art to motivate each other: “From awareness comes knowledge, or science; and
from skill comes art. In science, man feels himself in God; in art, he feels God
in himself.” In this spirit, Hann’s diary moved effortlessly between aesthetic
sketches and scientific observations. Poetic description might shade into the
scientific observation of clouds and their classification, and from there into a
synoptic vision of a storm.12

Landscapes of Desire

317

Hann’s diaries chart his deepening engagement with the science of weather
and climate. In later entries, his reports of meteorological phenomena grow
increasingly detailed and precise. Starting in 1861, he records his own thermometer readings, along with telegraphic reports of meteorological conditions elsewhere in Austria and beyond. His memory for weather events was
remarkably keen.13 Upon reading a paper published in 1862 about a storm that
struck Vienna in 1854, he was able to recall the details of the storm’s effects in
Kremsmunster: “I vividly recalled the day. It was a Friday, with a long Latin
class to come in the afternoon, as I headed home from school around 10. A
strong east wind was driving the clouds and frequently beat the branches of a
tall thin pear tree against the window of our living room. Just a couple of hours
later the storm swept in from the southwest.”14 From these recollections and
the time of the storm’s arrival in Vienna, he even made a rough calculation of
its velocity. On another occasion, upon acquiring a treatise on meteorology
by Heinrich Dove, Hann remarked: “With what joy does one receive such a
book, if one is prepared inwardly and thirsts for instruction.” Just over a month
later, he was able to observe for himself phenomena that Dove had described.15
He wrote repeatedly of his engagement with the new science of meteorology
as “the fulfillment of my wishes.” Hann’s passion for meteorology and climatology reflected the broad aesthetic and ethical aspirations associated with
cosmic physics by a leading Habsburg physicist like Baumgartner, who had
spoken of training “an eye that reaches out across the earth.”16 From such
grand aspirations sprang the intensity of Hann’s excitement for this science.
In the years chronicled by the diaries, Hann alternated between periods of
self-doubt and moments of ecstatic optimism. He often expressed these contrasts through spatial metaphors. Confidence was represented by an image of
a wide horizon, and despair by narrow constraints. He expressed his determination to rise above the Kleinigkeiten, the petty concerns, that distracted him
from his studies and his pleasure in the natural world— in his words, “the constantly agonizing disproportion [Missverhältnis] between my weakness and
the high aims towards which my powerfully building enthusiasm pointed me.”
In a similar spirit, Humboldt had written in Cosmos of the “contrasts between
what is morally infinite and our own narrowness, which we aspire to escape.”17
Cosmic physics in the tradition of Baumgartner confronted the individual
with the undeniable fact of his own smallness, “allowing one to feel more
deeply one’s own narrowness [Beschränktheit].” Gone was youth’s illusion of
omnipotence, its blindness to its own constraints. In this way, cosmic physics
could right a young man’s sense of scale: “Eternally constant nature! Thus you
mock our inner storms, our joys and our pains!”18 How harmless the “storms”

318 Chapter Eleven

F i g u r e 4 1 . View of the Falkenmauer from near Kremsmunster, by Adalbert Stifter, ca. 1825.

of one’s daily life appeared when measured against those of the heavens. Hann
thus set himself the goal of developing a more realistic sense of proportion.

Longing
A central theme of Hann’s diaries is the conflict between his longing for foreign
landscapes and his persistent Heimweh or homesickness. On homesickness,
Hann cited the German geographer Carl Ritter, who held that the impression
made by one’s native landscape was “so deep” that a separation from this environment brought on a form of sickness, “in which a person’s whole being may
dissolve into longing.” Ritter explained Heimweh as an “uncanny” remnant
of a primitive stage of human life that persistently haunted modern societies
that had otherwise freed themselves from the bonds of nature.19 When Hann
wrote of Heimweh, he implied both a general nostalgia for youth, typically
symbolized by a beautiful boy, and a longing for a particular place: the abbey
at Kremsmunster.
Hann had formed such close ties with his teachers and classmates at Kremsmunster that parting from them between terms caused him great pain. He expressed special affection for the younger students— “nice, lively lads”— whom

Landscapes of Desire

319

he occasionally instructed. Of one young student, he remarked: “The refreshing directness and unaffected spiritedness of the handsome boy moved me
strongly. Here bubbled a well of fresh vigor with its natural force intact.”20 A
reunion with a group of boys provoked a similar outpouring: “Greeted all the
dear fellows, the nice chaps, whom I always find so cheerfully stimulating. A
marvelous charm lies in the freshness and innocence of boyhood, a charm
that we feel all the more vividly and longingly, the more the expansion of our
knowledge confines us for good to a small sphere, and then again are bound
to feel ourselves outwardly confined by conventions.” Hann singled out one
companion in particular, a boy he referred to as “der kleine Alex.”21 Upon
Alex’s departure from Kremsmunster, he recorded:
The days that followed were dreary and bleak! The parting, the separation
from everything I loved so much, everything that had become so intimately,
so completely a part of my inner life, plunged me into misery— which, with
my sensitive nature, and in the absence of other stimuli, crushed me nearly to
a stupor. All my attempts to master myself [mich zu ermannen] failed, none of
my studies could hold my attention, nothing could tear me from the tantalizing
[quälend] memories.22

Hann experienced these longings, along with his loneliness in the absence
friends and family, as a crippling weakness; he felt “unmanned.” He went on to
upbraid himself for his timidity and solitary ways. Apparently, the homoerotic
bonds that he had formed at Kremsmunster threatened to derail his pursuit of
a career in the imperial capital.
In these years, Hann fantasized frequently about traveling. He often read
travel stories by writers like James Fenimore Cooper and Charles Sealsfield,
admiring the latter’s “splendid, vivid descriptions of nature and society in
North America.” His diary from these years contains a list of books on scientific exploration that he hoped to purchase, from Ross’s account of Antarctica,
to Darwin on South America, to a collection of narratives of round-the-world
journeys.23 He writes often of his “longing” for certain foreign places. “My
readings have once again inspired a powerful longing to see the seaside and
filled me with day-dreams and imagined scenes.”24 The landscapes he envisioned, often quoted from literature, combined clichés of the Mediterranean
with wild fantasies: a purple moon, the roar of steamships on the Mississippi,
the golden light of Vesuvius radiating over the bay of Naples. One summer in
Kremsmunster, he wrote that the quality of the light “awakened my desire to
travel and a deep longing for the wonders of distant southern lands, especially

320

Chapter Eleven

for the richly colored barren expanse of the blue sea!” And then he copied
out the 1838 poem “Sehnsucht” (Longing) by Emanuel Geibel, composed as
a farewell to his friends in Berlin before embarking on a long-awaited trip to
Athens. It begins with the traveler’s ambivalence:
I look into my heart and I look into the world,
Until a burning tear falls from my eye,
Though the distance glows with golden light,
Still the North holds me fast— I will not arrive.
O the bonds are so tight and the world so wide,
And time goes so quickly by!25

Through poetry, Hann was finding a way to articulate the conflict he felt
between his longing to travel and his craving for home. In his familiar Upper
Austrian hills, in the popular lakeside resort of Gmunden, he expressed disdain for the superficial gaze of the tourist: “This place is teeming with tourists and life here disorients my sun-bedazzled heart, used as it is to solitude
and familiar surroundings. The eye blinded and seduced by the gleam of the
surroundings forgets that infinitely more lies in the depths of one’s own soul
[Gemut].”26 Nonetheless, Hann believed that travel could also benefit the
soul. Shortly after parting from his gymnasium friends in August of 1860, in
the depths of loneliness, Hann was able to distract himself with his first rail
journey. In Salzburg he seems to have thoroughly enjoyed the role of tourist.
Shortly after, he took an overnight trip to Wels, Upper Austria’s second largest
town. He described this emphatically as an expansion of his horizons: “This
little excursion had the benefit of teaching me to recognize that there is much
that is beautiful and desirable beyond my former horizons.”27
Hann’s diaries thus record his struggles to master his sensitive character, in
order to make his way into the circles of imperial-royal science— a quest that
began with his enrollment at the University of Vienna in the fall of 1860. The
city did not agree with him. He felt insecure in academic circles, awed by his
professors. The amusements of student life made him uncomfortable, even
physically ill. “At home this evening,” he reported. “Lifeless, in an ill humor,
and physically unbalanced from indisposition. And outside bleak weather.—
I’d taken part in some vacuous, inane form of fun, which always leaves me
quite morose.”28 Hann particularly hated laboratory work, always comparing
it unfavorably to field research in the open air. He spent Christmas conducting
chemical experiments with charcoal powder, succeeding only in transforming
“plenty of time and money into filth and stench.” Meanwhile, the university

Landscapes of Desire

321

was rife with “electrical-machine fever.” Students built the machines themselves out of wood, glass, and metal, as the cuts on their hands attested.
Ceaseless labor with Leyden jars and batteries, until the golden spring peered
so brilliantly through the window that it drove us irresistibly outdoors into
the newly blooming natural world, and all the papers and cartons and jars and
disks are left in peace. Then thoughts and feelings that were cooped up until
now in the narrow room and nailed to all the tools turn outwards again; again
they follow the clouds and winds, towards the pure blue of the sky and throw
themselves like lovers [sich liebend] on the blooming earth.29

Spring meant liberation, but waiting for it was agonizing. His laboratory work
gave him the disturbing impression that “all the roots of my life had been cut
and ripped out of their soil.”30
In December, Hann returned to Kremsmunster for the Christmas break,
which he spent happily studying the role of rising air currents in the formation
of storms. “The familiar, friendly landscape suddenly showed me a thousand
things that were new and beautiful and spoke to my heart.”31 In lines that Hann
later copied into his diary, the Moravian poet Hieronymus Lorm explained
the significance of Heimatsgefuhl, or affection for the homeland. Lorm observed that this affection would be regrettable if it came at the expense of an
engagement with the wider world. “It would be a profound shame, that even
an active individual can know and enjoy such a vanishingly small part of the
infinite variety of creation, if it were not the case that even the smallest part is
a microcosm of the whole.”32 Learning to see home as a microcosm of a wider
world was a key step in the process of scaling.
Gradually, as Hann began to feel at ease with his new colleagues in Vienna, his confidence returned. Coming home to his rented room in Vienna at
two in the morning after an uncommonly pleasant evening, he looked out his
window and saw the summer sun already beginning to brighten the eastern
sky. Glimpsing a distant rainstorm, he felt the “cool, fresh, plant-scented air
blowing from the east.” These impressions “mingled” with joyful memories
of early morning hours in the mountains of his homeland. The effect proved
unsettling: “Experienced a painful morning, painful evening! The time is not
yet ripe! When will the day come when I can finally be at peace: blue skies,
sunshine again at last!”33 The expression “the time is not ripe” (das Maß ist
noch nicht voll) points to Hann’s sense that his Heimweh was a state of disproportion between past and present. Another evening, having taken great
pleasure in a concert at a friend’s home, it felt to him that “every little worry,

322

Chapter Eleven

the vanities and petty cares of life, they all vanished for me, since I paid no
attention to them and they had no effect on me.” The small, the local, the
personal were not without significance, but one had to learn how to read their
meaning in the context of a larger whole. He turned to the science of the atmosphere to orient himself in a wide world that was just beginning to reveal its
horizons.
One spring evening, as the sun was starting to set, Hann wandered out of
the “torment” of the laboratory, feeling “irritated,” and made his way through
the “dusty, foul-smelling streets” to the Prater, where “the evening sun was
spreading golden sparkling light over the majestic trees.” He moved quickly
through spaces that were “teeming with people” and “full of life, noise, and
music,” and soon found himself in a forest. The setting was “exquisite,” and
the air was fresh and piquant from the new greenery, with a gentle breeze from
the east. Hann wandered “as if in a dream” from one charming scene to the
next, “intoxicated by the sultry, misty air,” visited by “alluring, wistful” visions
of his homeland in springtime, “half fantasy, half memory.”34 The Prater became a frequent destination for him, a space in which he could reorient himself. He began to grow fond of life in Vienna— of his classmates and professors,
and of the cultural offerings in the capital.
In early October 1861, Hann was preparing to leave Kremsmunster for his
second year of university. He spent his days in the forest, readying himself
for the transition to Vienna, and paid particular attention to the relationship
between nature on the small scale and the large.
Took pleasure in the colorful fusion [Farbenschmelz] of the near and the
far— out in the forest the freshest, most singular life of nature on the small
scale— listened to the mutual stimulation of plants and animals by the water
that pools between entangled, moss-covered roots of fir trees. . . . Adieu, beloved valleys and peaks, you have comforted me once again! You have taught
me to extract from every milieu the side that allows me to let adversity wash
over me— everywhere, to preserve the inner freedom that stands above external circumstances with mastery and control.

Hann’s apostrophe is to be taken seriously. The moss, fir trees, and mountain
peaks of this landscape functioned as tools of scaling. They taught him to
perceive the interrelations of “the near and the far,” which here “fuse” into a
single impression.
Now Hann seemed ready to venture further. He spent a day traveling the
Danube by steamer, with the narrow, winding river creating “new landscapes”

Landscapes of Desire

323

at every turn. “A tremendous desire to travel took hold of me.”35 Many of
his travel fantasies came and went, but the dream of the Italian coast held
constant. In 1857, a stretch of the Sudbahn railway had been completed that
connected Vienna to the Adriatic. Hann learned in 1862 of the “Triest pleasure
train.” It was, at last, an opportunity to see Austria’s own seaside, and Hann
seized it “with joyful excitement.” On the seventh of June, he set off from Vienna’s Sudbahnhof. The route led along the Bruck River through Styria, past
Ljubljana in Carniola, across the karst plains, and along the Istrian coast. He
found the views breathtaking, although the coffee was “undrinkable” and the
water “horrid.”36 Upon arriving in Triest after a twenty-four-hour journey, he
was overcome by emotion. “It was too much all at once, so overwhelmingly
powerful was the view. A moment of undiluted joy, of bliss, as is accorded to
one who sees his most ardent, secret wish suddenly fulfilled.” From the train
station, Hann and his traveling companion headed for the harbor and hiked
up to the town of Muggia for the views over the sea. After checking into their
hotel and eating a late lunch, they returned to the harbor and boarded a ship to
tour the coast. Hann recorded the look of the clouds, the unusual quality of the
light, the sublime immensity of the sea, and, repeatedly, the great breadth, the
“freedom” of the blue horizon. His experience of enchantment extended from
the scenery to the company in which he found himself: “There was plenty of
merriment on the ships, and people even danced to the music that accompanied us.” Hann decided to devote his “full attention” to the “wonders of the
sky and sea” and the “exhilarating life” around him. The “cute, tanned sons of
the Italian captain tussled and chatted” next to him, and the gentle sounds of
their language moved him deeply. “I almost envied the youths, for whom the
sea would be life’s vital principle.”37 After his initial sense of disorientation,
Hann found his bearings in this new environment; he was able to interpret its
light and clouds and to identify with its inhabitants.

Crisis
In the fall of 1862, Hann accepted a position teaching physics and mathematics
at a secondary school in Vienna that was a short walk from the university. At
the ZAMG, he had access to the growing archive of geophysical data from
across the Habsburg territory. There he found colleagues who shared not only
his enthusiasm for climatology, but also his determination to organize the new
science and give it a public outlet. In 1865 the Austrian Meteorological Society
was founded, and in 1866 the first issue of its journal appeared, with Hann
as one of two editors. That year also saw the publication of his article on the

324

Chapter Eleven

origin of the foehn wind, which would make his reputation as a pioneer of
dynamic climatology.
At this point in his diaries (1866), his entries become more erratic, and his
handwriting less legible. Often they consist of notes on distant weather events,
copied from newspapers or scientific publications. This is clearly the journal
of an energetic young researcher with international connections and a wide
frame of reference, plunged deep into his investigations. Already, Hann was
beginning to correlate weather patterns across great distances— commenting,
for instance, on observations of polar lights near Riga and in various North
American cities, or drawing an analogy between seasonal weather patterns in
Siberia and in western Europe. It is here that he begins to outline a popular
work on cosmic physics, which was to address the “earth as a whole, in relation
to the movement and illumination of the cosmos,”38 evidently the germ of his
Allgemeine Erdkunde of 1872, which went through five editions. It is here too
that he begins to compile information on the climate of Greenland. Weather
observations from Greenland had been recorded since the eighteenth century
by Moravian missionaries and published in German journals.39 But this data
had never been scrutinized. Hann was interested in patterns of anomalous
weather in Greenland and their timing in relation to anomalies in central Europe. His younger colleagues Exner and Defant would follow up this line of
research. Hann was thus the first to begin to pose the kinds of statistical questions that would eventually lead to the identification of the correlation pattern
now known as the North Atlantic Oscillation.40 Hann would go on to publish
on this topic in 1890 and again in 1904. By this time, other researchers had
begun their studies of such “teleconnections.” In a published article of 1906,
Hann reflected on this shift in scale:
It is very gratifying to observe that meteorological research is striving once
again to gain a wider horizon. For too long it has studied and followed exclusively the small atmospheric disturbances that pass over Europe in the form
of barometric depressions. . . . If one examines the relative space that Europe
occupies on a globe, one must immediately realize that meteorological progress will not be served by precise studies only of the local phenomena that play
out in this confined space.41

Hann was suggesting that European climatology of the nineteenth century
had suffered from its provinciality. What was necessary was a new sense of
proportion, a recognition that the weather of the European continent was but
a small piece of a much-larger puzzle— for the atmosphere of distant regions

Landscapes of Desire

325

might well affect the climatic patterns experienced in Europe. Hann observed
that the British Empire would seem to have been custom made for this kind of
research. Yet the British were so narrowly focused on storm warnings that they
did not consider the climatological significance of their data. What they failed
to realize, according to Hann, was that the study of atmospheric phenomena in
the southern regions of their empire might help to explain their own weather
patterns back home in the British Isles. Climatology offered the tools necessary to attain a proper sense of proportion.
As Hann progressed in his education and came closer to seeing himself in
the role of imperial-royal scientist, he reflected on the qualities necessary to
serve the state well. Was he cut out for such a position of leadership? “The
state demands complete individuals,” he observed, “not scholars, artists, industrialists.”42 And yet he expressed equal disdain for those who “fall into the
sin of those remarkable personalities who believe themselves suited for any
office— even though, from one administration to the next, they have visited
no other classroom than the ministers’ cabinets.”43 Compounding his selfdoubts were his ongoing attacks of Heimweh. He still hoped to learn how to
make himself at home in the world, to attain the “knowledge to be able to live
anywhere, cheerfully at work and in regular contact with people.” Yet “the
heart wishes for a Heimat, an isolated point amidst endless wanderings.”44 He
sought a center, an origin: what Husserl would call the “null point.”
In the early summer of 1869, he began to express more intense feelings of
homesickness and an almost desperate nostalgia for the scenes of his youth.
Then comes the entry of 9 August, in which he confessed a profound uncertainty about his future: “A period of sadness— the decision is made, I will
not pay the price of my life for an uncertain future— very likely vanity,” and
he refers to himself as one who has been set back by fate. “Take me back to
you, forests; your peace, your mercy to a tormented, wounded heart, as in the
days of youth . . . I return to you, a penitent son, return to the depths of your
joyful peace.” We are left to wonder what the setback might have been that
had made his future so uncertain. Two weeks later he was at Kremsmunster,
reading poetry, hiking, and reuniting with old friends. His entries for the fall
of 1869 and spring of 1870 are sparse. Then, in the summer of 1870, after a
couple of fleeting sketches of hikes in the Vienna hills, he scrawled: “25. July.—
Contrast— received the full impression— firm decision to break with this life.”
There follows the annotation, “see 9. Aug. 1869!”— the day on which he had
renounced his “uncertain future” in Vienna. The following page of the diary
has been cut out. The next entry is from 24 August, reporting that he has
arrived in Kremsmunster. No further reference is made to his “decision.”45

326

Chapter Eleven

Could he have been contemplating leaving his academic career to follow a
fantasy described earlier in his diaries— that of living as a monk and naturalist
at Kremsmunster? There are no further clues.
Seven years later, at age thirty-eight, he became the director of the ZAMG
and a full member of the Vienna Academy of Sciences. The following year
he married Louise Weinmayr, a daughter of a district court official in Upper
Austria and a granddaughter of Karl Kreil, and the couple went on to have four
children.46 There is no sign that he regretted these choices. Yet it was his crisis
of 1869– 70 that gave shape to the narrative that Hann retrospectively intended
his diaries to tell. It was indeed a story of the making of an imperial scientist,
fraught with self-doubts and with conflicts between desire and duty— a quest
in which Hann looked to the tools of climatology to recalibrate his sense of the
relative significance of things.

Interlude: Historicizing Desire
Hann was not as quick as Stifter to dismiss desire as a distraction from the
study of the natural world. Hann rejoiced in the vitality that he associated
with desire, and he even seems to have accepted homoeroticism as appropriate
within an educational setting— as long as it could be displaced onto the natural
world or otherwise serve as a stimulus to the quest for knowledge.
In the span of the generation that separated Hann from Heinz Ficker (1881–
1957), both the geography and the connotations of desire changed significantly.
In the 1860s Hann fought his nostalgia for his Alpine Heimat by trying to
cathect the domesticated wilderness of the Prater and the karst landscapes
along the tracks of the Sudbahn. In this way, he developed a sense of himself
as an imperial-royal scientist and gained confidence in his capacity for scaling.
While Hann’s fantasies roamed south to the Mediterranean, Ficker’s would
wander east, to the Muslim world. In 1878, the Habsburg army occupied
Bosnia, bringing 499,000 Muslims under Austro-Hungarian rule. Historians
have argued that the sympathies expressed by Catholic Austrians for Muslims
thereafter functioned to legitimate this move, by suggesting that Austrians and
Turks were bound by “shared experiences.”47 Like Hann’s imaginative identification with the Italian-speaking boys in Trieste, Ficker’s fascination with
Muslims both in Croatia and central Asia should be understood in relation to
an ideology of empire.
Ways of speaking about desire were also shifting by the late nineteenth
century. What had been a Romantic concept was increasingly framed by the
discourse of medical pathology. Viewed through a Darwinian lens, deviations

Landscapes of Desire

327

from normative heterosexuality required neurophysiological explanation. It
was in this period that European medical experts began to attribute a powerful
influence on human sexual function to climate. They cited climate as a key
factor in sexual maturation, often prescribing climatic cures for those suffering sexual dysfunction as a result of nervous disorders.48 “Even amongst the
civilized peoples of Europe,” Sigmund Freud wrote in 1905, “climate and race
exercise the most powerful influence on the prevalence of inversion and upon
the attitude adopted towards it.”49 While historians have focused on racial
theories of sexuality, many of Freud’s contemporaries emphasized the effect
of climate even to the exclusion of race. Sir Richard Burton famously argued
that pederasty was “popular and endemic” within what he called the Sotadic
Zone. This was a region encompassing most of the inhabited world— except
northern Europe, Russia, and southern Africa, where the inhabitants were
“physically incapable of performing the operation and look upon it with the
liveliest disgust.” Burton stressed that this phenomenon was “geographical
and climatic, not racial. . . . I suspect a mixed physical temperament [i.e.,
mixed between masculine and feminine] effected by the manifold subtle influences massed together in the word climate.”50 This conviction found echo in
Ellsworth Huntington’s influential theory of the global “distribution of human
energy on the basis of climate.”51
Within Austria-Hungary, the effect of climate on sexuality was a central
theme of the controversial novels of the Galician writer Leopold von SacherMasoch. His fiction is thick with erotic descriptions of the landscapes of the
northeastern periphery of the Habsburg lands. Consider his most notorious
novel, Venus in Furs. The story unfolds at a “little Carpathian health resort,”
where the protagonist “lies in his window,” taking the air. He lives according
to a “system” remarkable in part for the role of climatological self-observation
by means of “thermometer, barometer, aerometer, [and] hydrometer.” Outside, the mountain landscape is said to “tremble” and “undulate”; it seduces
and intoxicates. At one point, he rides out on a donkey, intending “to numb
my desire, my yearning, with the magnificent scenery of the Carpathians.”
He returns, however, “tired, hungry, thirsty, and more in love than ever.” His
love object, whose hair is described as “electric,” attributes her own sexual power to the atmospheric electricity generated by her fur pelts: “It is a
physical stimulus which sets you tingling, and no one can wholly escape it.
Science has recently shown a certain relationship between electricity and
warmth; at any rate, their effects upon the human organism are related. The
torrid zone produces more passionate characters, a heated atmosphere stimulation. Likewise with electricity.”52 Given this set of associations, it should

328

Chapter Eleven

F i g u r e 4 2 . Heinrich von Ficker (1881– 1957), ca. 1920.

not be surprising to find that late nineteenth-century Habsburg climatologists took an interest in the effects of atmospheric conditions on their own
excitability.

C l i m ato l o g i ca l M o d e r n i s m
Just as Goethe’s Romantic fiction provides a key to unlock Hann’s journal,
so does modernist poetry help us to decipher the personal diary of Hann’s
younger colleague Heinz Ficker (figure 42). To read Ficker’s journal of his
1913 expedition to central Asia, one must know something of the literary circle
in which he moved back home in Innsbruck. For Ficker was not a product of
Kremsmunster, like Hann and Kreil, nor of Bohemia, like Purkyne and Suess.
He had been born in Bavaria, but moved as a teenager to the Tyrolean capital, where his father, Julius Ficker, became professor of history. In Innsbruck,
Heinrich’s brother, Ludwig Ficker, became the center of a famous circle of
literary modernists. This was a movement fascinated by a realm of experience
that was inaccessible to logic and empirical science.53
In 1906 Heinz Ficker completed his dissertation on foehn at Innsbruck;
three years later, his brother Ludwig began work on a new Tyrolean literary
journal titled Der Föhn. A coincidence, but a revealing one. Der Föhn, the

Landscapes of Desire

329

journal, was a celebration of the Tyrolean Heimat or homeland. As its editors
decreed, its goal was to give a “complete picture of Tyrolean intellectual life.”
It was packed with hymns to Alpine nature and reports on Tyrolean folk culture. Soon after its founding, however, Ludwig Ficker broke with Der Föhn’s
editors over their narrowly provincial vision for the journal. It was then that
he conceived the project of founding his own journal, an enterprise that took
shape in conversations with the poet Carl Dallago. As their letters record,
Ficker and Dallago struggled to reconcile the value they placed on their Tyrolean roots with their far more cosmopolitan ambitions. This tension reflected
a growing conflict between conservatives and liberals in Tyrol, which became
acute during the 1909 commemoration of the one hundredth anniversary of
the Tyrolean rebellion against the Napoleonic occupation. Two versions of
Tyrolean regional identity clashed at this juncture: one politically conservative,
chauvinistically German, and anti-Semitic; the other progressive and cosmopolitan.54 For Ludwig Ficker, the result was a new literary venue in which,
as he explained to another friend, the Tyrolean aspect would appear only in
the title, “otherwise nowhere; only in the topical article with which I intend
to conclude each issue will local problems be tackled, but only in so far as
they lend themselves to perspectives of more general significance.”55 The new
journal would thus make it possible, as Dallago put it, to “go from my Heimat
out into the public.”56 Drawing out the political implications of this venture,
one Jewish poet wrote Ludwig to confirm that the new journal would be an
appropriate place for him, a Zionist, to publish.57
Ludwig Ficker’s new journal would prove one of the most influential in
the history of German modernism. The title that Ficker chose as the only
mark of its Tyrolean roots was Der Brenner, after the famous Alpine pass that
connected northern and southern Tyrol. In Austria, the Brenner pass symbolized a vital link between Germanic and Mediterranean cultures. But it also
evoked the nationalist tensions between German and Italian speakers south
of the Alps. It was a site rife with meaning for the historian Julius Ficker, father of Ludwig and Heinz, who had defended the integrity of the Austrian
Empire against the project of “small-German” unification and in the face of
Italian nationalism. His study of Italy concluded that it would fare best under
Austrian control, which offered unity and protection while nurturing diversity. The Brenner, both the pass and the journal, were thus more than a road
out of provincial isolation— they symbolized the world-historical mission of
the Habsburg Empire. The Brenner played an equally central role in Heinz
Ficker’s volume on Tyrol for the Climatography of Austria, in which the pass
evoked simultaneously opposition and unity between contrasting climates.58

330 Chapter Eleven

He too was staking Tyrol’s claim to a kind of provincial cosmopolitanism, as a
bridge between the cultures of northern and southern Europe.
Like the literary modernists around Ludwig Ficker, Heinz Ficker experimented with symbolism in his landscape descriptions. In an article on foehn
for a popular mountaineering journal, he conjured “a cold winter’s night in
a mountain valley.” Even in the silent, wind-still valley, disconcerting signs of
the foehn’s approach could be heard and seen— the rustling of fir needles in
the forests high above and the uncanny quality of light: “full of a wild, sickly
fervor is this play of colors, a sinister weather sign.”59 As it happens, a strikingly
similar vision of foehn’s arrival appeared in one of the first and most famous
poems to be published in Der Brenner, which introduced the world to one of
the great German modernists of the twentieth century, Georg Trakl. “Suburb
in Föhn” (1912) moves from a description of the oppressive, noxious atmosphere during foehn to an evocation of quite a different world— an orientalist
vision of eastern romance and indulgence.
The foehn winds tinge meager shrubs more colorfully
And the redness slowly creeps through the flood . . .
. . . From clouds gleaming avenues surface,
Fulfilled with beautiful chariots, daring riders.
Then one also sees a boat failing on cliffs
And sometimes rose-colored mosques.60

As both Ficker and Trakl emphasize, foehn’s approach, accompanied by falling
pressure and stagnant air, accentuates the oppressive isolation of their provincial home. Yet the wind arrives with such a play of light and color that Heinz
Ficker described foehn as a “master painter.”61 For Trakl, the wind evokes the
mysteries of foreign lands, whence perhaps it blows. Dramatized in this way,
foehn becomes a fitting metaphor for the confluence of the provincial and the
cosmopolitan that Tyrol’s young liberals were then working to promote.

Alai, Alai!
Ficker would continue his literary experiments during his explorations of the
Russian east. He was still a student of geology in Innsbruck when he first traveled to the southern periphery of the Russian Empire in 1903. The conditions
of this journey were spartan, and Ficker traveled not as an imperial scientist
but as a mountaineer, determined to “conquer” the region’s peaks. He and his
sister Cenzi joined a party of central Europeans led by Willi Rickmer Rick-

Landscapes of Desire

331

mers, the man who introduced skiing to Tyrol. Cenzi scaled a 4,700-meter
peak and so impressed the local aristocrat that he offered her the mountain
itself, “as a gift.”62 Cenzi was soon known as the foremost female alpinist of
her era. She returned east with Rickmers in 1907, recording meteorological
observations that her brother Heinz would rely on for a study published the
following year. In 1913 both siblings would follow Rickmers to Turkestan.
In a journal labeled Diary of the Pamir Expedition, 1913, Ficker left behind
a dozen pages of never-published sketches with titles like “The Most Beautiful
Hour” and “A Distant Evening.” On the surface, these are descriptions of landscapes and the moods they evoked, along with telling details of what Rickmers
called the “piquant little amusements” that the party indulged in. Read more
closely, these sketches are canny descriptions of what happened when Ficker’s exoticizing fantasies collided with his on-the-ground experiences. Evident
throughout the journal is Ficker’s imaginative identification with many of the
locals he encountered, above all with those he recognized as victims of oppression. So, for instance, one entry opens with an orientalist vision of “the goal,
the limit of our journey. There lay Afghanistan— shuttered and full of secrets.”
A local chief points out the border, bids them good night, then retreats to what
Ficker realizes must be the “dirty hole” in which he keeps his harem. When
the door opens silently, Ficker glimpses the women within: “the whites of the
eyes of two girls. Then a low, strange noise, that escaped hauntingly from the
mouths of the women, and a strained murmur from the man.” “A Thousand
and One Nights!” Ficker exclaims, mocking his own naïveté. What he has
seen is unclear, but the very ambiguity of it and the surrounding silence— “the
mountains stood silently and guarded the last, defiant sickle of the expiring
moon”— are unsettling. The situation raises a question, one that Ficker poses
explicitly elsewhere in the journal: who in this wide world bears responsibility
to respond to this apparent injustice?63
There was, of course, a much-older tradition of European laments over
the mistreatment of women in Muslim societies, which was often racist and
hypocritical. But Ficker’s observations were free of moralism and remarkably
self-aware. In a village near Samarkand, his companion, a coarse Russian, leads
him in search of liquor and whores. “Not many years ago people who sold
Schnapps and wine were still tortured. ‘A dreadful culture!’ my companion
whispered. Then he laughed. ‘But we’ll get some yet!’” Soon this acquaintance goes off with some prostitutes, and Ficker learns that the women earn
fifteen kopecks per client. “Just think,” another Russian remarks. “If they do
it a hundred times, they’ve only earned 15 rubles!” As they walk out into the
night, Ficker reflects to himself that once these women too had been infants,

332

Chapter Eleven

and a mother had “stood by the cradle and prayed for her child.” The second
Russian expresses pity both for the prostitutes and for the local men: “Isn’t
it horrible: we’ve conquered this land and now we supply it with Schnapps
and whores!” Ficker’s next line is crossed out, and the sketch ends simply:
“I inquired no farther.”64 Silences of one sort or another typically close the
sketches, acknowledging the complexity of the questions they raise.
Another entry describes Duschanbe, “the summer resort of the Ottoman
Empire.” Here Ficker’s party experiences “refreshing nights, humid mornings,
then shimmering heat all day with a fiery hot wind and blowing dust.” One
evening, musicians start to play for them, and a girl begins to dance— “A pale,
delicate, contented, and probably depraved girl.” As Ficker watches her move,
he begins to wonder who exactly is singing. “We don’t understand it. We see
it only in the gleaming eyes of the men who swarm around the girl. . . . ‘This
could make one crazy,’ a companion near me says and wipes the sweat from his
forehead. I know what he means. Yes, we all know it: this is no girl. . . . A dancing boy, a boy in girls’ clothing! How beautiful the little rascal is!” Ficker then
admits that he had known what to expect and had laughed at the prospect. Indeed, rumors had long circulated among Europeans of cross-dressed dancers
in the Muslim world.65 But these Europeans find they cannot tear themselves
away. Ficker despairs at this sudden surge of desire. “How beautifully everything has gone until now. No stirrings of desire, no buoyant longing. And all
of a sudden it’s this push and pull [hin und her]. As if the senses were made
to order [Wie hergestellt sind die Sinne.]” He and his companions prepare to
depart, but the thought won’t leave him: “And if there are no women, why not
boys?” They’ve “had enough”; they feed their dogs and turn to go. Ficker
thinks: “God knows— what would happen if one had to remain longer in such
a land!”66 The dreamlike quality of this sequence, where reality blurs with
fantasy and desire surges unexpectedly, is reminiscent of Sacher-Masoch’s
fictions of the imperial periphery. In the tradition of orientalism, Ficker attributes a seductive quality to the landscape itself, connecting this sudden wave
of desire to the “shimmering” heat and torrid wind. The question of what
he would do were he to remain in Turkestan follows from this writing style.
Like Sacher-Masoch, Ficker adopted an imaginative engagement with the oppressed, which easily shaded into the thought experiment of “going native.”
At a deeper level, then, the journal tracks the subtle effects of Ficker’s encounters in Turkestan on his perception of himself. This is evident on his return journey, as he passes through Muslim communities within the Habsburg
borders, in Croatia. There he encounters a beautiful girl of about fourteen, at
work driving an ox in a mill, as she is brutally beaten by the miller. “The child

Landscapes of Desire

333

suffered in silence, and her dark eyes shone as if with mercy.” “Appalled,”
Ficker makes some gestures about the rough treatment. “The men laughed
outright and gesticulated and took pleasure in my anger. I was shocked. How
did this all come to us [Wie kam uns alles]?” Was this not a country where
children were treated “more royally than elsewhere,” where women and children were spared hard work? In this way, the question of moral responsibility
came home with him.
Ficker was forced to admit that it was not in Russian Asia but in Habsburg
Croatia that he had witnessed the most disturbing brutality. “When I think of
that moment, sweat still forms on my brow. Why didn’t I feel like hitting the
miller in the face with my whip? Why could I tolerate a human being tortured
before me for hours? It was not fear. Perhaps the feeling that I could do nothing
to change the girl’s fate.” Ficker felt he would forever be haunted by the suffering eyes of this young girl, “these eyes that tell me that, in that moment, I was
not a man.” Once again, his masculinity seems to hang in the balance. Perhaps
in answer to this self-accusation, he looked back over his voyage and arrived at
a reckoning. He had not seduced any women. “Sleeping with them is only an
adventure for me when it is a testament to a long courtship.” Having secured
his masculine identity in this way, he went on to suggest that the value of these
recorded experiences was to “give perhaps a better idea of the constitution of
a traveler in distant lands than a broad description of the foreign land itself.”67
Indeed, the theme of these sketches is the question of how profoundly travel
might change the traveler.

T y r o l t o T u r k e s ta n
With these experiences in mind, let us turn to the scientific conclusions that
Ficker drew from his firsthand research in central Asia. In his 1908 paper on
the climate of Turkestan, published before his expedition and based solely on
station data, he had argued that Russian Turkestan was a “dying,” “forsaken”
land. This mountainous, arid region owed its fertility to runoff from melting
glaciers, but these glaciers were shrinking, and, as a result, the region faced
irreversible desiccation. Its present fertility was due solely to artificial irrigation, an unsustainable practice: “For the more water that I artificially divert to
a region today, the more I deprive another region and deliver it up to destruction.”68 In his studies published after his return from central Asia, he mustered
further evidence of desiccation in this region, from the shrinking of forests
to the retreat of glaciers. He was more convinced than ever that Turkestan
was a dying land. Now, however, Ficker saw Turkestan’s problems in a wider

334

Chapter Eleven

frame: “In no case however will what man destroys in this region be replaced
by nature; indeed, how quickly under such conditions whole regions can become permanently void of trees is clearly shown by the Karst region and by
many stretches of the southern Alps.”69 Thus Ficker did not stop at cautioning
Russians against overexploitation of their natural resources; he also hinted at
the need for conservation in regions of Austria. Instead of a contrast between
enlightened west and uncivilized east, he saw two regions suffering a related
fate, linked by a global climate system.
Ficker’s journal can thus be read as a record of the emotional work of scaling.
As his published reports make clear, observations of the natural environment
could not be separated from observations of human customs, since natural
conditions were so sensitive to human intervention. Likewise, the imaginative
effort to relate the Alps to the Pamirs seems to have been inextricable from the
emotional effort to empathize with the inhabitants of Turkestan. Scaling was
at once a bodily, kinesthetic process and a moral act. In order to replace the
absolute distinction between near and far with a measure of degrees of separation, firsthand observation alone is never enough; at some point, it becomes
essential to trust in foreigners. In the capacity to imagine communities beyond
one’s own lies the origin of the mathematical concept of infinity, according to
Husserl’s student Ludwig Landgrebe. In short, the empathy that Ficker exercised in his journal was an essential part of the process by which he scaled from
what he knew of the Tyrolean Alps, to what he learned of the high Pamirs, to
what he extrapolated for the earth system as a whole.

Epilogue
Ficker’s journal also reveals a keen intuition of historical transition. From 1908
to 1919, an implicit theme of his publications on the desiccation of Turkestan
was the decline of civilizations and the fall of empires. Looking back on their
journey of 1913 from the perspective of the late 1920s, Rickmers would write
of the “transition from the voyage of discovery to the voyage of processing,
from the scout to the mobile observatory, from the hussar to the armored car of
science.”70 For Rickmers, this was the moment when the instrument replaced
the eye and the statistician replaced the storyteller. Such a contrast could only
emerge in retrospect, yet already in 1913 Rickmers had hinted that the role of
the explorer was in jeopardy. He lamented that a large expedition with a strict
“division of labor” left little room for personal liberty. In his view, it was Ficker
who represented freedom from such constraints. While the expedition leader
and the topographer were bound to fixed points on the ground, the geologist

Landscapes of Desire

335

was “a restless spirit,” requiring “freedom” for his work, able to “poke around
in every corner and taste the joy of discovery.”71
Ironically, Ficker’s next and last trip to the Russian east came as a prisoner of war. This time, his research would be restricted to calculations based
on published data. In this way, calculation acquired a taint of imprisonment,
while firsthand observation was all the more firmly associated with a lost age
of freedom. The opportunity to present his “Investigations on the Meteorological Conditions of the Pamir Region” did not come until after the war, in
1919, the year of the founding of the League of Nations— a moment that, in
retrospect, heralds the systematic internationalization of science and the end of
the age of individual exploration. Against this background, Ficker’s conviction
that the meteorological travel narrative would remain “highly popular in the
future” may seem incongruous. Of course, what he failed to foresee was the
rise of computers and satellites, with their unprecedented power to synthesize
masses of data, produce vivid images, and ultimately support global climate
models. In the computer age, the globalization of atmospheric science would
mean the abstraction of meteorological knowledge from the people and places
that produced it. Bjerknes’s “polar front,” a concept that began its rise to fame
in 1919, is a case in point. Ficker and Bjerknes both identified a hemispheric
discontinuity between polar and tropical air and recognized its role in generating cyclones. But Ficker focused on the climatological— one might even
say ecological— implications of this finding. Seeking the origin of cold waves
in Eurasia was, for Ficker, part of a broader quest to understand the connections between fragile climates like those of Tyrol and Turkestan.72 Bjerknes,
by contrast, hailed the polar front more narrowly and instrumentally as the
key to storm prediction.
With the triumph of Bjerknes’s interpretation in the 1920s came a loss of
meaning. Gone was the incentive to draw out the implications of this phenomenon at a regional, even local scale. The age of weather prediction was dawning, demanding that meteorological observations be reduced to neat numbers
that calculators (human or mechanical) could manipulate. Meteorologists and
physical geographers would soon part ways.73 Ficker’s report belonged to a different age, brimming as it was with observations and digressions that resisted
abstraction and quantification. His climate science remained a geographical
enterprise in the holistic style of a continental empire. Hence his decision to
pack in as much as possible— instrument curves, fine print, footnotes, and all.
Ficker’s journal from the Pamir expedition acknowledged the ambiguous
line between personal experience and scientific observation. One entry describes a distant view of the Peter the Great mountain range, noting that the

336 Chapter Eleven

czar was “a proud man, who is only supposed to have moved proud mountains.” It continues: “Science is something beautiful, especially when one like
us can do it on horseback. Before we reached the middle range from Almalik,
amid blooming meadows, high in the saddle, we forgot science.” Ficker’s reference to Peter the Great is tinged with irony, as the mountains dwarf the spatial
and temporal scale of human life. As it happens, Ficker struck a minor blow
at Peter’s legacy when he determined that the range “Peter the Great” was
not one but two mountain chains and proposed to apply Peter’s name only
to the western one. For the eastern chain he proposed the name Catherine
the Great— an appropriate choice, given that his companions included two
female mountaineers.74 Indeed, Ficker’s conflicted experience of sexual desire
in Turkestan links the theme of imperial decline and fading heroism to that of
imperiled masculinity. Against this background, the passage works reflexively
to underline the loss of meaning entailed in shifting from a personal to a scientific register. By “forgetting” science, Ficker could experience the mountain
and the moment in their full, sensual complexity. In it one might hear an echo
of Carl Dallago’s reference in Der Brenner to “science, where it is authentic;
but there it is no longer merely science.”75 Or one might be reminded of the
more famous words of another member of this literary circle: “What we cannot speak about we must pass over in silence.” This is the final line of Ludwig
Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921), another exploration of
the limits of science, which was originally intended for publication in Der
Brenner.76
Of course, the historian of science might be advised to stop reading at the
point where a scientist “forgot science.” But the question of what comes next,
of what lies “beyond” science, is too important.
Science led us here.
But it was not at the beginning.
Was it not in truth the longing for these unknown, mysterious mountains
that brought us here, 6000 km away? . . . 
We pined for mountain beauty . . .

Would reading further constitute an indiscretion? Should we think twice about
spying on the scientist as he privately swoons before a mountain he describes
as “powerful, commanding,” as a “Tamerlane of mountains”?
There is something more beautiful, far more beautiful, as great science: great
mountains.

Landscapes of Desire

337

In the shade of a tree stood a young girl, as if made of stone, with large eyes,
lightly clothed. In the snow her cheeks glowed and her brown, gentle eyes
looked around helplessly. Like a grouse chick the beautiful child stood before
me and lifted her gaze and lowered it again. The girl on the Almalik! My heart
warms when I think of that moment. A wish— still it seems to me there is no
desire in me— my buoyant, sinful desire.77

Perhaps it is time to replace the manuscript in its folder and return to serious
research. But what if this sensual, speechless moment does tell us something
about Ficker’s “science”? What lay “beyond science,” in Ficker’s terms, is
reminiscent of what Husserl called the “prescientific” or the “natural world.”
For Husserl, to recover this dimension of experience was not to renounce
science. The goal was instead to recapture the experiences that gave a scientific idea its original meaning in its original context. For Husserl, this was the
solution to the crisis of meaning in European culture of the early twentieth
century. In pressing the question of the relationship between science and desire, Ficker may have had a similar intuition. “Now what was science, what
were the mountains?”

Conclusion

After Empire

In 1949, the geographer Hugo Hassinger, born in Vienna in 1877, was nearing
the end of his life in a defeated, discredited, foreign-occupied Austria, roughly
one-tenth the size of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Hassinger had been allowed to continue in a leadership position at the University of Vienna after
1945 because he had never joined the Nazi Party. Still, doubts remained about
his politics. During the war, as director of the “Southeastern Europe Research
Community,” Hassinger had produced scholarship designed to legitimate Hitler’s conquests in that region.1 He had even plotted the resettlement of ethnic
Germans in the conquered lands. His publications had been shot through
with the language of “German living space.” Now, in Allied-occupied central
Europe, this vocabulary was untouchable. So it was that in the twilight of his
long career, at the dawn of the Cold War, Hassinger was returning to the rhetoric of imperial-royal science.
In Austria’s Nature and Destiny, Rooted in Its Geographic Situation,
Hassinger made a case for this ailing country’s significance in the postwar
world order. He argued that Austria was more than a “border zone” between
ideologically opposed regions. It was the protector of the supranational tradition of the Habsburgs and of the very idea of Europe. The Habsburg Monarchy had been “European,” he argued, not only in its thinking, but even in its
landscapes. He pointed in particular to the “diversity of climatic phenomena,”
manifest in the “climatic contrast between the icy region of the high Alps and
the Mediterranean climate; between the forests and Alpine meadows dripping with moisture and brushed by the oceanic westerly winds, and the dry
pannonic climate zone with poor irrigation and lakes without outlets.”2 This

340

Conclusion

“rapid variation within a small space of the energy associated with relief, soil
type and regional climate” results in the most varied “forms of economic activity.” As in the images propagated a century earlier by Minister von Bruck,
Hassinger attributed Austria’s vitality to the dynamism of neighboring contrasts, to the “energy” associated with “rapid variation” in space. However, he
borrowed the imagery of atmospheric warfare more common in the tradition
of Dove and the Bergen school than in Habsburg climatology. Central Europe
was the region “where continental and oceanic forces struggle against each
other,” and “precisely here lies the deeper significance of Central Europe’s
existence.” It was the “battleground of oceanic and continental forces in the
atmosphere and on earth, where plants, animals, and people and their cultures
stand locked in conflict with one another.” And yet he insisted that these opponents “also depend on each other to seek a compromise [Ausgleich], such
that Central Europe can also be regarded as a European space of equilibration
[Ausgleichsraum].”3 Like von Bruck and his nineteenth-century contemporaries, Hassinger tied the fate of central Europe to a pregnant linguistic slippage
between the physical tendency of neighboring extremes to “balance” each
other out and the diplomatic tendency of nations to “compromise.”
How naturally this vision flowed from the pen of a man who, just four years
earlier, had hoped to subject this entire region to Nazi rule! A man who had
been planning the expulsion of non-German populations from South Tyrol,
the Burgenland, and the Inner Carpathians was now paying tribute to the
marvelous diversity of these lands. How could this be?

C l i m at e a n d t h e F at e o f C e n t r a l E u ro p e
The Habsburg trope of unity in diversity had met resistance from the start, and
the skepticism only intensified with the outbreak of war in 1914. Two years in,
the economist Ludwig von Mises lashed out against the idea that there was
anything natural about the Monarchy’s unification of contrasts. Arguing that
barriers to free trade are always irrational, von Mises ridiculed the notion that
a state could foster political unity by imposing protective tariffs at its borders.
His prime targets were two popular proposals for the postwar European order:
Fredrich Naumann’s economic conception of Mitteleuropa (1915) and Karl
Renner’s federative socialism. Renner had described Galicia as “organically
bound” to Austria— despite its mountainous border— by the grain, timber,
petroleum, and spirits that the former supplied to the latter, as well as by the
iron, textiles, and paper that flowed from the latter to the former. Von Mises
quipped that one might just as well describe Austria as “organically bound” to

After Empire

341

Great Britain and its colonies, in view of the sugar, tea, and cocoa in Austrian
pantries. Ultimately, von Mises argued that any future protective union would
impede at least one member from the development of industry. In this sense, it
would constitute not a state of “economic community” but one of “economic
war.” And yet, even as he rejected these organic metaphors, von Mises adopted
the physicalist language of equilibration. In his analysis of the flows of labor
and capital, he wrote of the “balancing out” (Ausgleichung) of contrasts of
wages and profits.4
The Hungarian historian Oszkar Jaszi likewise scorned the ideology of
natural diversity in his bitter 1929 history, The Dissolution of the Habsburg
Monarchy. Despite their political differences, Jaszi, like von Mises, saw this
rhetoric as a cover for the economic exploitation of one population by another (though he emphasized divisions of class rather than nation). Here is
his apt caricature of the old arguments for the Austro-Hungarian free-trade
zone: “Behold the Habsburg monarchy gives the privilege and opportunity
to many peoples and countries different from each other in natural conditions, in language, in culture, in economic development, to trade with each
other without the obstacle of custom barriers and, therefore, to complete each
other in the most harmonious way. . . . How advantageous and progressive
this free trade is!”5 Jaszi recognized that this argument had not lost its power
in the 1920s. That much was evident from the significance of free trade for the
Pan-Europe movement. Notably, however, despite his patronizing tone, Jaszi
accepted the premise that natural diversity was inherently valuable. “The more
two or several economic territories can offer to each other,” he affirmed, “the
more they complete each other, the more advantages free trade promises to
them, the more disadvantage if tariff walls separate them.” Remarkably, among
the reasons he cited for the failure of the Habsburg customs union was its relative climatic uniformity. “The preponderant part of the monarchy furnished
the articles generally produced in the temperate zone, and in this respect the
differences within the monarchy were not great or decisive.”6 That Jaszi would
engage in debate over the degree of climatic diversity in the former Habsburg
lands suggests that the question of central Europe’s destiny continued to be
framed partly in the naturalistic terms introduced in the 1850s.
In fact, Austria-Hungary’s claim to be a “natural unit” was a matter of intense dispute during the Great War. Among geographers in imperial Germany,
it became common even before 1918 to describe Austria as an “unnatural”
state doomed to disintegrate along national lines.7 On the other hand, Austrian geographers continued to defend the “geographical foundations” of the
Habsburg state in terms inherited from the “whole-state” discourse of the

342

Conclusion

1850s. Norbert Krebs, for instance, wrote in 1913 that Austria-Hungary’s natural diversity made it “self-evident that an active exchange of varied products supports cultural development and that the possession of these products
makes the state more autonomous.”8 Robert Sieger, writing in 1915, insisted
that the physical diversity of the Habsburg territory inevitably produced “the
strongest cultural contrasts” and was, therefore, a sound foundation for economic self-sufficiency.9
After the Monarchy’s collapse in 1918, climate remained an organizing principle in discussions of the fate of the former Habsburg lands. Now, however,
climate was more often construed as a deterministic force than an adaptable
resource. One of the most radical visions for the future came from the philosopher and statesman Richard Nikolaus Coudenhove-Kalergi, son of an Austrian diplomat and his Japanese wife. Coudenhove-Kalergi’s “Pan-Europe”
movement, launched in 1923, envisioned a unified Europe as technocratic
utopia. Technology, in Coudenhove-Kalergi’s terms, was a European invention, a “spiritual” endeavor to harness nature for human ends. In Europe, he
argued, the social question was at base a matter of climate. Europeans lived in
a state of “climatic unfreedom,” at the mercy of their cold winters and short
growing season. By means of technology, Europeans had already succeeded
in transforming “northern primeval forests and swamps into cultural paradises.”10 The solution to the social question, therefore, was not political but
technological. Coudenhove-Kalergi has been cited as an inspiration to the simultaneously technocratic and Romantic ideals of the European Union. It has
gone unremarked, however, that his eclectic commitments were held together
by the idea that climate was the ultimate obstacle to freedom in Europe.11
Climate was equally central to the future of central Europe as imagined
in influential works by the Austrian geographer Erwin Hanslik. Hanslik had
studied with Penck at the University of Vienna. In 1915 he founded the Viennabased Institute for Cultural Research, dedicated to reinventing the Austrian
Idea for a new age.12 Hanslik’s formative research concerned the “GermanSlavic language border.” As he explained in the introduction to his dissertation, the origin of this project lay in his personal experience of the contrasts
between German and Polish cultures, while growing up as the son of a factory
worker in Galicia in the 1880s and 1890s. As Jeremy King and other historians
have made clear, it was in the years of Hanslik’s youth that nationalist agitators
began to compete to identify individuals and communities as speakers of one
national language or another, even if the individuals declared themselves to be
comfortably multilingual.13 As Hanslik explained, he hoped that his research
might “have a moderating influence on the language war” by providing “sci-

After Empire

343

entific insight into the nature of the language border and the nature of AustriaHungary.”14 That is, he hoped to settle the question of linguistic identity once
and for all by means of a line on a map.
Hanslik, a working-class Galician by birth, seems to have coveted the
mantle of imperial-royal science. In that tradition, he rested his claim to scientific authority on his personal experience of the Monarchy’s natural diversity,
as “someone who for many years has been in the habit of combing through
the western and eastern mountains alternately,” and whose mind could distill, “among all the details,” a true “natural border.” Hanslik’s analysis was
ostensibly modeled on the climatological and plant-geographical studies of
Hann and Kerner von Marilaun, from whom he also drew most of his data.
He borrowed their methods for tracking small spatial variations in climate
and vegetation in order to define natural regions. What he did not adopt was
their recognition that “climatic borders” were contingent and subjective, dependent on the choice of statistical procedures and modes of botanical classification. In Hanslik’s hands, the methods of Habsburg climatology became
a crude means of dividing Europe in two. From the evidence of meteorology
and botany, he claimed, there “leaps into view” the great geographic division
of Europe between west and east, “oceanic” and “continental.” The eastern
and southeastern portions of the Monarchy constituted not an “equilibrium
climate” (Ausgleichsklima) but a “border climate” (Grenzklima), an “alteration
of mastery [Herrschaft] between western and eastern climates.” In the manner
of climatography, he rested this claim on bodily experience: “Whoever lives
in these lands, learns this well enough by observing himself. He comes to orient himself accordingly for the sake of his health.”15 From this simplification,
Hanslik made a conceptual leap not to be found anywhere in the writings of
Hann or Kerner. Namely, he associated climatic zones with national spaces.
“The great Germanic-Romanic nations of western Europe are limited to the
oceanic region, the Slavic ones to the continental and transition region. Thus
the horizontal classification of Europe and the climatic one are especially
closely related.” This quickly brought him to the remarkable conclusion that
“the language border between Germans and Slavs is not a random line that
derives simply from historical processes.” Rather, “it is a line already drawn
by nature.”16 In this spatial boundary Hanslik also saw a temporal divide, a
Kulturstufe, a contrast between two stages of cultural development.
Hanslik pressed this image of European geography on a broad audience
through the publications of his Institute for Cultural Research, which illustrated his border between west and east using bold, modern graphics.17
He also advanced it in an essay on the Carpathians for the 1915 illustrated

344

Conclusion

F i g u r e 4 3 . The photograph that introduced Hanslik’s essay on the Carpathians in Mein
Österreich, Mein Heimatland (1915).

compendium Mein Österreich, Mein Heimatland.18 This two-volume work
might have looked, at first glance, like an updated and abridged version of
the Kronprinzenwerk. It too proceeded from physical to cultural geography.
However, its German-nationalist authors abandoned Crown Prince Rudolf ’s
multicultural ideal and instead insisted on the superiority of German culture
at every turn. Fittingly, the accompanying photograph (figure 43) suggests
a German scientist-explorer gazing down on an unpeopled “wilderness” of
“eastern space.”
Hanslik concluded that Europe possessed an east-west “cultural gradient.”
In Inventing Eastern Europe, Larry Wolff famously traced the roots of this
conceit to the travel narratives of eighteenth-century western European writers. Yet the physical metaphor of a cultural “gradient” was first articulated
circa World War One. Sieger used it in 1915 and appreciatively attributed it
to Hanslik.19 This stubborn concept, central to so much academic theoriz-

After Empire

345

ing about eastern Europe in the twentieth century, was the direct result of a
bastardization of Habsburg climatology. If earlier Habsburg thinkers had likened cross-cultural interactions to the physical equilibration of contrasting air
masses, Hanslik was the first to assume that cultural contrasts could be graded
on a linear scale like barometric readings of air pressure.
Hanslik’s scholarship exemplifies the perversion of the Habsburg tradition
of dynamic climatology to suit German-nationalist aims in the era of the First
World War. Like Hassinger, Sieger, and Coudenhove-Kalergi, he tended toward environmental determinism. Although he borrowed empirical evidence
of climatic diversity from Hann, Kerner, Suess, Supan, and their colleagues,
he used it to support a naive map of civilization and backwardness. Missing
entirely from his thinking was the new meaning that climate had acquired
in the dynamic framework of the late nineteenth century. There climate had
come to be understood as a multiscalar, dynamic system sensitive to small
perturbations— and as a circulation that connects rather than divides, creating
relations of mutual dependence. Climate as used by Hanslik was closer to its
eighteenth-century meaning: static, regional in scale, and deterministically associated with discrete and hierarchically ordered human cultures. Missing too
from the writings of these early twentieth-century Austrians was the implied
audience of nineteenth-century climatography: the citizens ready to exercise
their rights of mobility and free enterprise. This was physical geography written for leaders prepared to impose order by force on the human and natural
complexity of central and eastern Europe.
In this way, the nineteenth century’s naturalistic imagery of unity in diversity was co-opted to support German imperialism of the twentieth century.
This transformation reflected the radicalizing experience of the Great War.
Following Max Bergholz, one might tentatively describe this as a phenomenon of “sudden nationhood”: a “counterintuitive dynamic in which violence
creates antagonistic identities rather than antagonistic identities leading to violence.”20 We can glimpse something of this process in the private wartime correspondence of certain Habsburg geographers, particularly Bruckner, Sieger,
and Krebs. Early in the war, these men were buoyed by the potential of their
research to inform not only military strategy but, ultimately, the future map of
Europe. By 1915 Krebs was already speaking of framing his work “no longer
for the field marshals,” but already “for the diplomats.” In 1919 he expressed
the aim of serving what he called Deutschtum.21 The Central powers’ reversal of fate hit these men particularly hard. In the immediate wake of the war,
Bruckner and Sieger complained bitterly of the “unnatural” terms of the peace
treaties. By this they meant that Austria had been shorn of its “productive

346

Conclusion

regions” and was economically unfit for survival. The diplomats in Versailles
had “cut Austria off by an unnatural border from its necessary sources of assistance”; they had “torn apart” a “unified economic region.”22 Violence crept
into the very language of geography.

Scientific Pluralism
Yet there is no reason to believe that, before 1914, naturalists’ celebrations of
the environmental diversity of the Habsburg lands had hidden a Germannationalist agenda. On the contrary, the practice of imperial-royal science was
highly pluralistic, as judged by the standards of the twenty-first century.23 Consider that the practice of science today is restricted to the exceedingly narrow
segment of the population who are accredited as experts; it is largely monolingual, conducted in scientific English and mathematical symbols; and its
results are published in a limited number of elite journals, incomprehensible
to general readers. By contrast, the Habsburg field sciences engaged a wide
range of participants. Though weighted toward the Alpine and Bohemian
lands, volunteer observers across the Monarchy produced meteorological,
balneological, phenological, and seismological measurements, often in languages other than German. Indeed, even after the empire’s collapse, stations
across the former crown lands continued to send climatological observations
to Vienna on a monthly basis.24 Prominent among these observers were local
teachers, physicians, pharmacists, civil servants, and proprietors of spas and
resorts, among them a handful of women. To be sure, the directors of the
ZAMG were invariably Catholic, male, native German speakers. But not all the
scientists employed by the ZAMG were ethnically German. At war’s end, one
had taken up Czechoslovak citizenship and found employment at the observatory in Prague, while two others with Czech names were awaiting judgment
on their petitions to remain in Austria. Meanwhile, scientists who had worked
for Habsburg observatories outside Austria’s new borders were in the process of nationalizing the infrastructure of imperial science. The eagerness with
which the new nation-states seized meteorological stations and instruments
suggests that this was never an exclusively German-Austrian enterprise.25
True, the tributes we have seen to the climatic diversity of the Habsburg lands
were published in German. But this does not imply that the authors identified as Germans. Rather, German was the principal language of international
science in central Europe before World War One. A small number of eastcentral European scientists chose, under the banner of Pan-Slavism, to build
their international reputations in Russian; otherwise, Habsburg scientists

After Empire

347

F i g u r e 4 4 . Portrait of Julie Moscheles/Moschelesova (1892– 1956), by Zdenka Landova.

tended to stake claims to original research in German, regardless of national
affiliation.26 This was all the more true in atmospheric science, for which the
Vienna-based Meteorologische Zeitschrift was the leading international journal.
These varied participants brought to climatology many different goals, and the
ZAMG supported a wider range of them than national meteorological offices
of its day.
In the nation-states of post-Habsburg central Europe, on the other hand,
science was expected to serve, above all, the national interest. Under these
circumstances, it was an effort to maintain a commitment to thinking at scales
other than that of the nation. Few fought harder to do so than the geographer
Julie Moscheles (see figure 44). Against all odds, she had begun a doctorate
in geomorphology under Alfred Grund at the German university in Prague.
During the war, her interests came to include climatology, which she pursued
in the descriptive and statistical manner of climatography. Climate was one
among several fields of research for this extraordinarily prolific scholar, who
expanded from physical to human geography in the mid-1920s. Indeed, far

348

Conclusion

more was expected of her than of her male colleagues. While one book-length
study would normally suffice for the habilitation, it took her twenty years, five
monographs, and roughly sixty scientific journal articles.27
But her gender was only one of the obstacles to a scientific career. Born in
Prague to a wealthy Jewish family, she had lived much of her childhood with
an English uncle, a peace activist with whom she traveled widely. In the new
Czechoslovak state, she was a German among Czechs and a Brit among Germans. As she explained in 1919 (in English) to William Morris Davis, “You do
not know how cruel some people can be on account of national hatred and
how they can make suffer their victims!” Still, she remained optimistic and
committed to the new Czechoslovak state, publishing increasingly in Czech
rather than German. “So by blood and friendships I belong to two nations and
live in the state of a third one,” she wrote. “It is perhaps on account of that, that
I have no sense for national feuds.” She drew a revealing analogy between her
identity and her scientific research: “It is just as in the landscape: we distinguish forms of the air, the glacial cycle, but everywhere we also find the forms
worked out by the running water which I would compare to life and soul of
all human beings only a little modified by circumstances but always to be recognized and loved.”28 Here was the lens through which Habsburg scientists
had been trained to see the natural world: to track flows and exchanges across
space and time even as they marked out the peculiarities of local landscapes.
Ironically, after the Monarchy’s collapse, the naturalist who most successfully
embodied the Habsburg ideal of supranational science was a woman.

Scaling Down
And yet Julie Moscheles was not quite alone in her struggle to maintain this
internationalist spirit after Austria-Hungary’s defeat. As director of the ZAMG
in the early 1930s, Wilhelm Schmidt argued to the Austrian ministry of education that “of all Austria’s scientific establishments, the Central Institute embraces not merely the widest circle of beneficiaries, from the simplest farmer
and tourists to researchers studying the conditions of life; it also certainly
has the broadest and strongest international connections: our weather and
climate are of course part of the general circulation of the whole earth.”29 This
was far more than the boast of a scientist desperate for funding. As we have
seen, Schmidt’s research on atmospheric “exchange” aimed to represent those
“connections” with mathematical precision.
In Czechoslovakia, meanwhile, a proposal was taking shape for the first
“world center” for climatology. Its author, Leo Wenzel Pollak, was a Jew by

After Empire

349

birth who had trained in cosmic physics at the German university in Prague,
studying with the climatologist Rudolf Spitaler. In 1927, inspired by the use
of punch cards in the American business world, Pollak patented a calculating
machine adapted to the needs of climatologists, geophysicists, and astronomers. Unlike the US scientists who began to digitize atmospheric physics in
the immediate aftermath of World War Two, Pollak was not trying to solve the
problem of weather forecasting. He wanted his machine to analyze periodicities
in climate data, the kind of work that Julius Hann had so painstakingly carried
out by hand.30 In 1942, Pollak was credited with “the first practical introduction
of the punched card system into meteorology.”31 By that time, however, he had
been driven out of Nazi-occupied Czechoslovakia. He was fortunate to find
refuge in Dublin, where his last publication was a handbook of statistical methods in climatology— coauthored with another Jewish refugee from the former
Habsburg lands, Victor Conrad. The historian of science Paul Edwards goes
so far as to suggest that Czechoslovakia might have become “the world’s leading center for climatology,” had economic and political crisis not intervened.32
However, internationalist science like this was not a priority for the interwar
Austrian and Czechoslovak governments. Rather, the most successful domains
of atmospheric research in the successor states of Austria and Czechoslovakia
were the newly christened subfields of “local climatology” and “bioclimatology.” These enterprises were, in part, a pragmatic response to postwar conditions. With the Monarchy’s collapse, central European climatologists had
lost their advantages of scale. As Sieger put it after the signing of the peace
treaties, “It is all the more necessary to order observations of the immediate
surroundings, since the trains must suspend service for weeks at a time and
they are overcrowded and exorbitantly priced.”33 Moreover, atmospheric scientists needed to prove their value to the new governments. Up against the
postwar economic crisis, the ZAMG’s director, Felix Exner, addressed himself simultaneously to the ministries of transportation, defense, justice, trade,
agriculture, and health. He heralded the value of his institute for air travel,
agriculture and forestry, hydrography, mining, wind power, legal decisions in
tort cases, hygiene, transportation, and tourism. Still, proving this potential
would require fundamental shifts in methods.
Of necessity, climatology in interwar central Europe would supplement
Großraum (large-scale) climatology with research at the micro- and mesoscales. Still, these local sciences did not represent a break with the Habsburg
legacy. Rather, they adapted the scaling practices of imperial-royal science to
postimperial states. They defined a gradation of scales of analysis, from the
intimate to the global, along with the methods appropriate to each.

350

Conclusion

One focus of research in both interwar Austria and Czechoslovakia was
the climatology of mountains. As Exner reminded the authorities at every opportunity, research on mountain climates was a good investment. At Davos,
Switzerland, the site of Thomas Mann’s 1924 novel, The Magic Mountain, the
physician Carl Dorno offered sunlight cures for tuberculosis patients. Since
postwar inflation made Swiss resorts prohibitively expensive for Austrian citizens, Exner and Ficker began to hunt for an “Austrian Davos.” In the Meteorologische Zeitschrift in 1921, Ficker insisted that the eastern Alps contained
enough sunny peaks to treat “the suffering people from all over Europe.”34
Meanwhile, Czechoslovak climatologists and physicians focused their attention on the High Tatras. Although spas and sanatoriums had spread through
this region in the late nineteenth century, detailed studies of the climatic conditions were first carried out in the 1920s. The director of climatology at the
Prague Observatory, Alois Gregor (1892– 1972), took a particular interest in
the study of mountain climates. He measured the local atmosphere’s “thermal
comfort” by means of a wet-bulb thermometer; the intensity of ultraviolet radiation using a dosimeter designed by his Prague colleague Leo Pollak; and the
“purity” of the atmosphere visually, by inferring its “turbidity factor” using a
standard scale of shades of blue developed by Frankfurt climatologist Franz
Linke (1878– 1944) in 1922. Writing in Czech for a popular audience, Gregor
explained that the atmosphere is like a multistory building, and the first story
is of a “higher biological quality” than the ground floor.35
As bioclimatological measurements became standardized, so did the process of certifying a climatically therapeutic site (Luftkurort). In the Republic of
Austria, local communities could appeal to the ZAMG to be considered for this
designation. A scientist would then travel to inspect the area. If his initial assessment were favorable, he would order the installation of a “climatic observation
station,” consisting of eight instruments to be operated by local volunteers. An
analogous system existed in Czechoslovakia, administered jointly by the ministry of health and the national meteorological institute. Not every community
got the results they hoped for, however. For instance, the Lower Austrian town
of Mönichkirchen proved to have moderate summer and winter temperatures,
average cloud cover, but heavy snowfall; it learned in 1929 that it had been approved as a destination for convalescents, but not for the seriously ill. In the
words of the unfortunately named director of marketing for Austrian tourism,
Dr. Erwin Naswetter (“Wetweather”), these stations supported “the modern
view of advertising that sees the objectivity and truth of the commendation as
the chief requirement of a good piece of publicity.” As others in the tourist industry stressed, advertisements for climate therapy must exclude “speculation.”36

After Empire

351

Another focus of climatological research in interwar Austria and Czechoslovakia was the urban environment. “Red Vienna,” under Social Democratic
leadership in the 1920s, was an incubator for modernist projects to design a
more egalitarian city. Thus the intended audience for urban climatology included city planners, hygienists, architects, and engineers. Wilhelm Schmidt,
who pioneered this research in Vienna, was convinced that the city’s climate
was impairing the health of children and thus gradually weakening the urban
population. In The Artificial Climate of Human Surroundings (1937), he and
his longtime collaborator, hygienist Ernst Brezina, wrote that the task of urban
climatology “is to correctly influence municipal housing politics and to create
more bearable living conditions for the urban population, [conditions] which
correspond better to the physical and spiritual nature of man than is usually
the case for the urban dweller today.”37 Urban climatology thus developed as
an empirical physical science of “artificial climates.” In Prague, Alois Gregor warned forcefully that urban growth revealed the damaging “influence
of man on climate” as starkly as did the Dust Bowl disaster in the United
States.38 As the Vienna climatologist Friedrich Steinhauser reflected in 1934,
programs of “hygienic housing design and the functional design of communities” drove the need for “investigations of urban temperature patterns.” “What
was needed then,” he added, “was to invent new methods of investigation.”39
Wilhelm Schmidt explained: “What remains of air movement within enclosed
spaces— mostly in the form of drafts of light breezes— is of an essentially different magnitude than what we observe outdoors. The usual methods of meteorology fail here; those that replace them are indirect or highly sensitive.”40
For the study of urban environments, climatology would have to be rescaled.
Wilhelm Schmidt’s “mobile climatological observatory” was one solution.
It was no more than a large Opel fitted out with meteorological instruments,
purchased with aid from the Notgemeinschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaften
(Emergency Association for German Science) and the ministries of agriculture
and education. But it allowed him and his colleagues to take measurements
closely spaced in time at locations throughout the city and its outskirts. Thus
Schmidt measured the heat-island effect and analyzed air samples for impurities. In the urban environment, less familiar meteorological variables also became significant, such as levels of carbon dioxide and dust. In Prague, Gregor
emphasized the mesoscale of urban climate— that is, the influence of the built
environment up to a height of roughly fifty meters. In Vienna, Schmidt and
Brezina were more intent on the microscale, from a neighborhood down to a
single building or room. They even considered the “climate” of the space between a person’s clothing and his bare skin. They also introduced the notion

352

Conclusion

of a “personal climate,” which an individual could track in the course of her
daily migrations from home to streetcar to laboratory and back. As practical
measures, Gregor recommended expanding city parks, widening streets, and
improving indoor ventilation systems.41 Schmidt and Brezina, on the other
hand, perhaps influenced by the increasingly völkisch tone of Austrian politics,
endorsed the “green city” movement, which would build worker settlements
just beyond the city limits. They looked forward to a time when urban dwellers
would shed “their extreme urban character,” would “no longer think and feel
exclusively urbanly,” and would be “tied to nature like their forefathers who
worked the land.”42
In 1934, scientists in Frankfurt and Vienna founded the journal Bioklimatische Beiblätter as an offshoot of the originally Austrian journal Meteorologische Zeitschrift. The goal of the editors, Linke and Schmidt, was to unite the
various branches and methods of the sciences— physics, medicine, botany, and
geography— that dealt with the biological significance of climate. In doing so,
they expanded the meaning of “climate” beyond atmospheric phenomena to
include those that had been known to an earlier age as “telluric”: processes
originating in the soil and in the layer of air closest to the ground.43 Taken together, this area of study comprised the global domain that Suess had termed
the biosphere. Appropriately, interwar Austria and Czechoslovakia were the
recognized leaders of this new subfield. When Linke complained of the Weimar government’s indifference to health-related climatological research, he
pointed to the Austrians and Czechoslovaks as the pioneers of this valuable
new field. In 1928, the Balneological Congress held in Baden officially thanked
the Austrian and Czechoslovak governments for their support of medical
climatology— or “bioclimatology,” as it was increasingly known.44
As sciences of climate on the small scale, mountain, urban, and bioclimatology all built on methods developed by botanists to track minute spatial
variations of atmospheric conditions. We have seen how Emanuel Purkyne
pioneered such research in Bohemia in the 1860s. More immediately, in Klima
und Boden auf kleinstem Raum (1911), the Wurzburg botanist Gregor Kraus
had published observations of a startling variety of conditions in air less than
two meters from the ground. Yet it was primarily in the interwar period that
central Europeans gave “local climatology” its theoretical and methodological
grounding. The very first issue of Bioklimatische Beiblätter began by discussing the range of scales that were relevant. It provided what were likely the first
climatological definitions of the terms “micro,” “local,” and “large scale.”45 In
1934, Schmidt and Rudolf Geiger, the German author of the widely read textbook The Climate Near the Ground, argued that the older methods of large-

After Empire

353

scale climatology had grown out of man’s experience of traveling the world.
Its goal was the “study of the climate of a landscape.” A “local climate,” by
contrast, covered only part of a landscape, such as a single valley or cliff. Even
smaller, a “microclimate” could not even be recognized as part of a landscape;
it was, to a first approximation, merely flat. Different methods needed to be
used in each case.46 Echoing one interpretation of the new quantum mechanics, Schmidt pointed out that one could not apply the instruments of largescale climatology to the study of a microclimate, if only because they would
generate “a noticeable disturbance in the air under investigation.” The microscale was more sensitive to human activities, more “artificial,” in Schmidt’s
parlance. Where large-scale climatology relied on long-term means to cancel
out fluctuations of the meteorological elements, small-scale climatology was
interested in short-term variability, in the atmospheric extremes that shaped
the lives of plants, animals, and humans alike. As Gregor put it, “it would be
impossible to judge the quality of such places for the stated purposes according to common macro-climatological values, such as monthly temperature and
precipitation.” After all, one early frost was meaningless in the long term but
potentially life threatening in the short. Thus, as Gregor summed up, “the field
of local climatology (‘exposure’) is the main asset of all of twentieth century
climatology and deserves to be classed as an independent science.”47
The rise of local climatology was a direct consequence of the geopolitical
upheaval that followed the Great War, according to Wilhelm Schmidt. As he
saw it, the shrunken territory of Austria had both invited and demanded a
new approach to climate study. Within Austria’s new borders, thanks to its
predominantly mountainous terrain, weather “plays out spatially [räumlich
abspielt]” as much as temporally. Scaling down climatology made a virtue of
necessity. “The image of the climate,” Schmidt wrote, “no longer fits into the
familiar large scale; it demands methods of observation, analysis, and representation different from those we are used to.”48

C l i m at e i n W o r d a n d I m ag e
This brings us to a final element of continuity in central European climatology
across 1918: the pursuit of “the image of climate.” In 1937, Bohuslav Hrudicka
(1904– 42) in Brno argued programmatically for the value of the dynamic approach to climatology as a mode of representation and explanation in geography. In doing so, he echoed many of the values expressed by Habsburg
climatologists of previous generations. Statistical values were inadequate for
“tracing the effect of the climate on the organic and inorganic world . . . because

354

Conclusion

meteorological elements do not function in living and nonliving nature in isolation, but rather as a complex whole.” Underlining the need for a visualizable
conception of climate, Hrudicka insisted that weather, as the “foundation” of
climate, “must not fully disappear in the climatic picture, as it does in statistical
tables of values of meteorological elements.” In order to explain climate on
the small scale, in its “regional peculiarities,” science could not dispense with
“verbal description” and “abundant illustrations.”49
As this suggests, climatology in interwar central Europe held fast to the
“word and image” ideal. Indeed, Austrian literary writers of the 1920s and
1930s incorporated the vivid language of atmospheric dynamics to express a
sense of connection to the space of the former empire. For instance, Hugo von
Hofmannsthal, known for his personal sensitivity to weather, repeatedly used
images of “waves” to evoke the effects of cultural and ideological clashes. In
his 1917 essay “The Austrian Idea,” he wrote of an “energy” radiating out from
Austria “in renewed waves”; of Austria’s “inner polarity,” “genuine elasticity,”
and “flowing border”; and of the “cultural waves propagating toward the East,
but also receiving and ready to receive the counter-wave striving westwards.”
Appealing to the “spiritual space of the nation,” Hofmannsthal used atmospheric imagery to mediate between materialist and idealist conceptions of
the political community.50
Climatology also shaped the imagination of central European space in
novels of the war’s aftermath. While writing Strudlhofstiege (1951), set in Vienna in 1925, Heimito von Doderer was in close contact with the ZAMG,
“since he had to know whether and how it had rained at a certain time on the
day in question in the 1920s, before he described it.”51 Such historical accuracy mattered to von Doderer because the atmosphere was a psychological
force in his novel. It mediated the characters’ shifting sense of near and far,
past and present. In an early passage, for instance, certain qualities of light
and air, perceived in combination with a hint of an accent in a woman’s voice,
elicit a flash of consciousness in the protagonist. He feels an air current from
“a distant horizon,” a sense of being “sucked in all four directions of the compass . . . into the green, the open,” into spaces from which the city dweller
had been “alienated.” Longing for the imagined lands of an empire that exists
only in memory, he thinks of those “remarkable southern lands, which had
once belonged [to the city]. It had been five years now since those nerve tracts
had been severed.”52 This motif recalls another exemplary novel of the First
Republic, Karl and the Twentieth Century, by Rudolf Brunngraber. There
we read that “the longing to be far away [der Trieb ins Weite] seemed to have
become an epidemic in the ’20s.” The protagonist experiences a mounting

After Empire

355

wanderlust as he becomes acutely aware of the scale of the world, an experience he likens to the sensation of wind: “Then he suddenly felt the size of the
world, as if he stood outside in the night wind.” As the economic depression
of the 1930s takes its toll, however, Vienna becomes motionless, lifeless, and
Karl remarks on the absence of any “wind of existence.”53 Again, images of the
atmosphere in motion convey the shifting and uncertain geography of interwar
central Europe.
But surely the most famous literary memorial to Habsburg climatology is
the opening passage of The Man without Qualities, Robert Musil’s unfinished
philosophical novel about the Monarchy’s last years. It begins, somewhat perplexingly, with a meticulous description of the state of the atmosphere over
central Europe:
A barometric low hung over the Atlantic. It moved eastward toward a highpressure area over Russia without as yet showing any inclination to bypass this
high in a northerly direction. The isotherms and isotheres were functioning as
they should. The air temperature was appropriate relative to the annual mean
temperature and to the aperiodic monthly fluctuations of the temperature. The
rising and setting of the sun, the moon, the phases of the moon, of Venus, of the
rings of Saturn, and many other significant phenomena were all in accordance
with the forecasts in the astronomical yearbooks. . . . In a word that characterizes the facts fairly accurately, even if it is a bit old-fashioned: It was a fine day
in August 1913.54

Even as it parodies the statistical language of normality, the novel’s central
theme emerges immediately in this first paragraph: the tension between human experience and the scientific description of reality. Does this synoptic
weather report— a fair imitation of those that had appeared in newspapers
across the Habsburg Monarchy since 1877— actually refer to the same phenomenon as “a fine August day”? Why bother with precision if meaning can
be expressed the “old-fashioned” way? Of what value are statistical averages
if one is interested in individuals and their unique stories? In this case, the
scientific description appears to float far above the realm of human experience,
preoccupied with events at a scale utterly removed from that of human cares.
To stop there, however, would miss the profound role that climatology plays
in Musil’s writings as a metaphor for the relationship between the individual
and society. In “The Nation as Ideal and Reality” (1921), Musil recalled the
advent of war in 1914 in atmospheric terms: “One suddenly became a tiny particle humbly dissolved in a suprapersonal event and, enclosed by the nation,

356

Conclusion

sensed the nation in an absolutely physical way.” He described the nation as
an “enormous heterogeneous mass . . . that oscillates between solid and fluid,”
stressing the “atmospherically undefined nature” of the experience of patriotism.55 Two years later, in “The German as Symptom,” Musil envisioned the
European as a particle of air, his path hinging on the infinite contingencies of
pressure, temperature, and topography. The individual may be swept up on
large-scale historical currents, but his life course depends on local contingencies and “competing influences,” just as the chance of rain might depend on
how a particular mountain diverts a particular current of air. In this sense, the
European’s identity is not a function of race or Zeitgeist; it can be specified
only by a trajectory, one too complex to calculate in advance. The European
is not “destined” but “situated.”
In this geographic imagery, we can recognize the legacy of the interplay of
Habsburg science and politics. The genre of climatography, in particular, had
invited readers to imagine their relationship to the territory of the empire in
dynamic terms— not as a “dwelling in place,” as Martin Heidegger was then
in the process of theorizing, but as a contingent, and potentially turbulent,
circulation.

Scaling Up
A final legacy of the imperial-royal field sciences lies in the projects of scientific
internationalism that they inspired. A number of scientists took the Habsburg
state’s supranational scientific institutions as a model for the internationalization of science beyond its borders. These men believed that the methods of
collaboration and synthesis that worked within Austria could be scaled up to
further the cause of worldwide scientific cooperation. Beginning with the First
International Meteorological Congress hosted in Vienna in 1873, Austrian scientists led a series of endeavors to coordinate scientific research and natural
resource management the world over. Among these, for instance, was the first
International Polar Year of 1883, which aimed to round out the scientific picture of the earth system in three dimensions. It grew from a proposal by Karl
Weyprecht, a Habsburg naval officer whose internationalism stemmed from
frustration with late nineteenth-century nationalism and impatience with voyages of exploration that served merely “the vanity of national flags.”56 Driven
by a vision of supranational science, Weyprecht set in motion a series of initiatives that culminated in the International Geophysical Year of 1957– 58. Among
other examples of Habsburg-led internationalist science, one might cite Eduard Suess’s monumental geological survey The Face of the Earth; the Interna-

After Empire

357

tional Map of the World, which was first proposed by the Vienna geographer
Albrecht Penck in 1891; and the Overviews of the World Economy by Franz
Neumann-Spallart (which, as we’ve seen, drew its methods in part from climatology), along with the International Statistical Institute, founded in 1885 and
based on a proposal by Neumann-Spallart. Habsburg scientists also promoted
the international management of natural resources. Josef Roman Lorenz von
Liburnau, for instance, supported the coordination of forest-conservation policy across Europe. Similarly, Eduard Suess attempted to set international economic policy on more secure foundations by assessing the earth’s total store
of precious metals. Emanuel Herrmann likewise promoted international planning around the management of coal, petroleum, and other resources. Looking
to the European peace movement for leadership, Herrmann even proposed
transforming this “fragmented” continent into a common economic zone.57
Little did he know that it would take two catastrophic world wars to bring such
a plan to fruition. In all these cases, researchers extrapolated from their experiences with transnational science within Austria-Hungary in order to prescribe
mechanisms for coordinating research at multiple scales around the world.
While these schemes often proved to be both Eurocentric and utopian,
certain elements remain instructive today, in the face of the present climate
crisis. As we have seen, Habsburg scientists insisted that environmental research could not be left entirely in the hands of nation-states, nor could the
use of natural resources be left to the whims of the market. At the same time,
many of these scientists foresaw the dangers of globalization. Some warned of
the dire toll that empire-building could take on humans and nature alike, of
the violence of a colonial Raubwirtschaft or pillage economy. From a different
angle, some of these thinkers questioned conservation measures that were no
more than a cover for an empire’s appropriation of land and resources at the
expense of indigenous populations. Likewise, they pointed out that imperial
policies designed to protect inhabitants from natural disasters must not become substitutes for addressing the inequalities that left some populations
more vulnerable than others.58 These scientists worried too about the homogenizing effects of a global economy on the world’s cultural diversity. In
his influential 1906 study The Territorial Development of European Colonies,
Alexander Supan pointed out how much Europeans had learned from the
cultures of those they had colonized. Looking ahead to a world transformed
by European imperialism, he predicted that “a uniform world culture will not
emerge, and that is a good thing, for only in diversity lies movement and life.”59
Here we find the Habsburg principle of the motive force of local differences
scaled up to a hopeful projection for the future of the world.

358

Conclusion

Although this pluralist ideal did not always guide Habsburg governance
in practice, this book has argued that it did structure the practice of the field
sciences. The institutions of imperial-royal science coordinated research across
central Europe without imposing a single set of values nor demanding uniform
methods. Today, in the face of the urgent problems associated with climate
change, the main locus of international and interdisciplinary collaboration has
become the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Researchers from
eighty-five countries have contributed to the five assessment reports to date,
although those from North America and Europe made up 75 percent of the
authors of the first four reports (1990, 1995, 2001, 2007) and 62 percent of
the fifth (2013).60 What’s more, the IPCC has been criticized for pressing this
diversity of voices into a rigid mold of scientific consensus. Geographically,
its research has been said to skew toward the impacts of climate change on
industrialized nations; methodologically, it has emphasized economic analysis
over the perspectives of the other social sciences; and epistemologically, it has
avoided the kind of deliberative reflexivity that is the mark of effective pluralism.61 In this context, it is worth recalling that imperial-royal science aimed not
to “unify” its many moving parts but to “orchestrate” them— to borrow a term
from the philosopher of science Otto Neurath, born in Vienna in 1882. Neurath foresaw that future generations would need to address “problems of world
organization.” Yet he was confident that this could be achieved while allowing
“various ways of life” to “coexist.” What was needed was not unification but
“orchestration,” not a uniform world government but “a gigantic ‘muddling
through’”— precisely the term ( fortwursteln) commonly used to describe the
style of rule of the late Habsburg state.62 Neurath saw no reason why the international science of the future would need to sacrifice the principle of pluralism.

C l i m at e a n d t h e P o l i t i c s o f S ca l i n g
In the course of the nineteenth-century debates over the climatic impact of
human activities, the authority of the scientist came to be defined in a new way.
Scientists began to justify their interventions on the basis of their capacity to
judge the significance of things according to a more enduring scale that that of
the narrow spatial and temporal frame of a human life. To be sure, earlier men
of science had prided themselves on their cosmic vision or their appreciation
for nature’s minutiae. What was different in the nineteenth century was that
scientists were claiming the right to intervene on this basis in matters of public
policy. One of the first assertions of this competence came from Julius Hann
in 1869. Discussing the relationship between deforestation and desiccation,

After Empire

359

Hann insisted on the need for expert knowledge, for only the man of science
knew how to weigh “small causes” in nature: “The natural scientist is used to
taking the effects of small causes into account; the uneducated mind disregards
them, concerning itself only with forces that have compelled it to astonishment
or fear.”63 As we have seen, Hann presented himself as a naturalist for whom no
detail was too “paltry and minute,” and yet as a leader immune to the narrow
interests of “church tower politics.”
As public debate over the forest-climate question widened over the following two decades, scientists elsewhere took up this argument— most famously,
Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc. Though known for his restorations of medieval architecture, Viollet-le-Duc was also fascinated by the structure of the
earth and its transformations by natural and human agency. A geologist could
look at a mountainside and see its progressive modification through erosion,
just as an architect could look at ruins and imagine the structure they had
once been.64 In this way, Viollet-le-Duc was drawn into the nineteenth-century
debate over the reality of anthropogenic climate change. Could puny man really alter such a vast and ancient planet? “In the presence of great geological
phenomena, what is man?” In answer to this question, Viollet-le-Duc argued
that every large-scale change was the result of uncountable small causes, and
thus by small means humanity too could have a planetary impact, for better
or worse— the choice was theirs. The fate of the planet hinged on rethinking
the meaning of “small”: “There are no small measures in nature, or rather the
actions of nature only result from the accumulation of small measures.”65 This
pronouncement was repeated by French and Austrian foresters in the ensuing
debates over the forest-climate question.66 Here we find experts claiming the
right to guide environmental policy due to their ability to weigh facts that
might escape ordinary perception entirely. Implicitly, they claimed the capacity
to judge the world according to the scale of the earth itself.
If anyone wields moral authority of this sort in the United States circa 2017,
it is certainly not scientists. On the contrary, today’s climate scientists tend to
be wary of making any public claims that take them beyond the facts of their
research. Few would suggest that their studies give them any special wisdom,
nor even a more capacious way of viewing the impacts of human actions. Who
would believe them if they did? To their skeptics, scientists’ attempts to steer
attention toward long-term impacts are a mystification of the more urgent
problems of the here and now. Even many of their advocates would cringe at
the thought of scientists transgressing the line between facts and values. Even
the best human minds, they would say, are ill equipped to reflect on personal
choices in terms of long-term, planetary consequences. Indeed, it’s often said

360

Conclusion

today that climate change is a phenomenon unfolding on such a superhuman
scale that it exceeds our powers of cognition. It’s not easy for us to recognize
ourselves as the agents of the sixth mass extinction in our planet’s history. We
appear to be stumped by the problem of weighing the welfare of far-future
generations in our calculations of costs and benefits. Social scientists have expressed doubt that humans possess ethical intuitions about the consequences
of our actions across continents and generations. Psychologists are even gathering evidence that humans have a cognitive impediment to thinking with large
magnitudes. To quote the philosopher Dale Jamieson, “The scale of a problem
like climate change can be crippling.”67
These two ways of thinking about climate science— as the product of particularly farsighted minds, or as a form of knowledge in tension with the nature
of human cognition— share the same problem. It is a problem we are now in a
position to understand. Both views ignore the noncognitive work behind the
science of climate. As the historical analysis undertaken here suggests, scientific judgments about the significance of human actions in relation to planetary
processes have not derived from a unique perceptual faculty, nor from personal
wisdom. They come not as instantaneous flashes of insight, but as the result
of a process, the process of scaling. Scaling is a learning process, but it is not
exclusively cognitive. It can certainly be a process of calculation, of recalibrating size or duration according to new proportionalities. But this recalibration
often depends on new modes of representation and new ways of looking at the
world. It is, in this sense, an aesthetic process. It is also embodied: in order
to revise our sense of the relationship between the near and the far, we often
rely on kinesthesis, on the awareness of our own limbs moving through space.
Scaling is therefore a somatic learning experience— but it is not performed
by individuals in isolation. In order to orient ourselves with respect to distant
places or past times, we rely on the knowledge of others. This makes scaling
a social process as well, one often marked by conflict and negotiation. Least
obviously, scaling is an affective process. Revising judgments of the relative
significance of things in the world means letting go of some attachments while
forming new ones. So scaling is often accompanied by feelings of longing and
loss, by the seductions of the exotic, as well as by the pangs of homesickness.
From a historical perspective, then, modern climate science is a product of
scaling, a process that is not only intellectual, but also sensuous, passionate,
and politically charged. Scaling has been constitutive of the history of climate
science, and it will be equally vital to its future, since global warming threatens
the lives of communities that are drastically underrepresented in the highest
echelons of international science. Climatology thrived on the institutional-

After Empire

361

pluralism of Habsburg science, which generated skepticism from multiple standpoints toward every attempt at a synthetic overview. Future research
might consider how other scientific and political institutions, coupled to different infrastructures and different aesthetic cultures, have supported the work
of scaling, and with what consequences for other domains of environmental
knowledge. Today, the history of imperial-royal science stands as a reminder
that the Austrian Problem has no unique solution. Every means of representing unity in diversity inevitably masks some forms of difference at the expense
of others. In the words of the first ruler to call himself emperor of all Austria,
whether a matter is large or small is a question that cannot be judged a priori
and for all time. And so the work of commensuration continues.

Acknowledgments

The debts I have incurred in writing this book are beyond all measure. Early
on, I was lucky to receive advice and encouragement from three pioneers of
the history of atmospheric science: Jim Fleming, Vlad Janković, and Katey
Anderson. In Vienna in the fall of 2001, Christa Hammerl generously shared
her knowledge of the ZAMG. From 2004 to 2006, I was fortunate to be able
to explore the history of climatology as a junior fellow of the Harvard Society
of Fellows. It was there, too, that I retrained as a historian of the Habsburg
world, and I thank the east-central Europeanists among the junior fellows for
guidance, especially Tara Zahra. At Barnard and Columbia, where I taught
from 2006 to 2017, I benefited from conversations with many wonderful colleagues who shared my interest in the history of empires, as well as from the
chance to organize related events as acting director of the Center for International History in 2011– 13. In 2014– 15 I was a fellow at the Cullman Center of
the New York Public Library, and I am especially grateful to Jean Strouse and
the curators of the Maps Department for making it such a productive year.
More recently, I have enjoyed sharing ideas with members of the environmental sciences and humanities research cluster at Columbia’s Center for Science
and Society. I am grateful, too, for having had the opportunity to present my
research to helpful audiences at the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard, Cambridge, the University of Chicago, the New York Botanical Garden, and the
Consortium for the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine’s physical
sciences seminar.
Several colleagues have gone to great lengths to answer questions or read
portions of the manuscript and offer suggestions. Heartfelt thanks to Mitch

364

Acknowledgments

Ash, Mark Cane, Nuala Caomhanach, Holly Case, Dipesh Chakrabarty, Hasok
Chang, Paula Sutter Fichtner, Isabel Gabel, Emily Greble, Mott Greene, Chris
Harwood, Anna Henchman, Eva Horn, Fredrik Jonsson, Pieter Judson, Dan
Kevles, Matthieu Kohl, Melissa Lane, Ben Orlove, Jerry Passannante, Dorothy
Peteet, Steve Pincus, Adam Sobel, Jan Surman, Julia Adeney Thomas, Conevery Bolton Valencius, Andrea Westermann, Natasha Wheatley, and Nasser Zakariya. All of them have shown great patience with my clumsiness with subjects
ranging from Renaissance kingship to paleobotany. I feel enormously fortunate
to have had the chance to learn from these remarkable scholars and friends.
For helpful feedback I am also indebted to participants in the workshops
“Late Imperial Epistemologies” (Columbia University, 2013), “Creative Commensuration” (University of Zurich, 2016), “Experiencing the Global Environment” (Max Planck Institute for History of Science, Berlin, 2016), and “Biodiversity and Its Histories” (Cambridge University, Columbia University, and
the New York Botanical Garden, 2017).
For assistance with translations, I thank Chris Harwood, Bogdan Horbal,
Daniel Mahla, and Daniel Margócsy. Manuela Krebser and Gerlinde Fichtinger
contributed transcriptions of archival documents. It is also a pleasure to thank
four excellent research assistants: Cathrin Hermann, Katya Motyl, John Raimo,
and Sara Heiny. For shepherding this book into print with their usual attention
to detail, I am grateful to my editor, Karen Darling, and manuscript editor,
Mark Reschke.
Funding for the research, writing, and production of this book has been
provided by the National Science Foundation (award #0848583), the Cullman
Center of the New York Public Library, the American Council of Learned Societies, Barnard College, and Columbia’s Center for Science and Society and
Harriman Institute. Parts of the research for this book previously appeared in
Science in Context, the Journal of Modern History, Osiris, the Avery Review,
and Intimate Universality: Local and Global Themes in the History of Weather
and Climate, ed. James R. Fleming, Vladimir Janković, and Deborah R. Coen
(Sagamore Beach, MA: Science History Publications, 2006).
Size may be relative, but my largest debts are truly enormous. My husband,
Paul Tuchmann, and my children, Amalia and Adam, have shown more patience with me than any mom has a right to ask. Whenever remotely possible,
Paul has given me the gift of time, and done so with love and encouragement.
We are blessed to have the support of our parents, Ruth and Stanley Coen and
Naomi and Rob Tuchmann, and of our siblings and siblings-in-law. I would
especially like this book to honor the memory of my brilliant, courageous, and
loving sister Gwen Basinger, who lost her fight with cancer in August 2017.

Acknowledgments 365

Amalia and Adam, now eleven and eight, have learned to share me with a
project that must at times have seemed as all-consuming as a third child. They
have commiserated when I hit obstacles and cheered my progress. They have
grown into delightful travel companions for my conference trips, and they have
gamely joined in my long hunt for a title for this book. Most of all, I am grateful
that they have refrained from hurting each other when I was too busy writing
to break up their fights. This book is for them. I hope with all my heart that
their generation will be able to look back on the history of human knowledge
of climate change and see lessons learned in the nick of time and catastrophes
safely averted.






