The Retreat of the Elephants
An Environmental History of China

Mark Elvin


The straight tree is ﬁrst to be felled;
First drained dry, the well of sweet water.
“Trees on the Mountains,” third century bce, Zhuangzi


Landmarks and Time-marks
Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War
The Great Deforestation: An Overview
The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species
War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage
Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing
Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao
The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

Nature as Revelation
Science and Superfauna
Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives


Schematic model of China for rapid reference
The retreat of the elephants, 5000 BCE to present day
Hangzhou Bay, circa 1000
Hangzhou Bay, mid eighteenth century
Hangzhou Bay, 1986


Figure
1. Modeled revenue from cutting and selling a tree, with protection
costs, and the option of investing proceeds at interest


Tables
1. Time-marks in Chinese environmental history
2. Land formation by the Yellow River on its southern and northern
courses, from 1194 to 1983
3. The speed of advance, and the rate of accretion, of the Yellow River
delta from 1195 to 1854
4. Riverine and tidal ﬂows, with related sediment transport, in the
Qiantang River measured at Qibao Station
5. Seed-to-yield ratios for rice in late-imperial Jiaxing


Acknowledgments

Many other authors, friends, and colleagues have helped with the making of
this book, either consciously or perhaps unconsciously. Maybe even one or
two critics, opponents, and enemies. There is no way for me to be sure of
recalling all of them, nor maybe even to be aware of all of them. But I would
like to offer my gratitude, sometimes—sadly—only in memory, to those who,
I think, have been the most important.
First, to the late Kay Oldﬁeld, of the Soil Association, who taught me while
still a boy how to make a compost heap. Also to Rachel Carson’s writings,
beginning with The Sea Around Us; to the Whole Earth Catalog, and to the
Ecologist magazine, founded by Teddy Goldsmith, for all of them provoking
me into thinking differently—in what now seems an era long past. If I have
gone my own way since, that is where it started.
Second, to those who taught me to read classical Chinese after I graduated
in history from Cambridge: Ted Pulleyblank, Denis Twitchett, and Piet van der
Loon. The translations in this book are based on their teaching, though they
should in no way be held responsible for the idiosyncrasies and imperfections.
Third, to the late Joseph Needham. His inspiration as the founding father of
the history of Chinese science and technology—and a personal friend—was
crucial, even if—even from the start—my historical vision differed from his.
This last was shaped ﬁrst and foremost by the late Philip Whitting, the Byzantine scholar, who taught me history at St Paul’s School, London. A debt never
adequately repayable.
Fourth, to the libraries, bookshops, dealers in books, and generous fellow
scholars who have provided the bedrock information for research. My thanks
therefore in particular to Andrew Gosling (now retired) and his staff at the

x

Acknowledgments

East Asian collection of the National Library of Australia, to Susan Prentice,
formerly of the Menzies Library of the Australian National University, and
other members of the East Asian staff there, mostly now departed to other
employment, to John Moffett, the Librarian of the Needham Research Institute in Cambridge, a nonpareil of generosity, to Charles Aylmer, who presides
over the Chinese collection in Cambridge University Library, to the HarvardYenching Library in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the library of Columbia
University in New York for procuring copies of rare items vital for the study of
Guiyang and Zunhua, and to friends who gave me some key books: Professor
Liu Shuren of the Huadong Normal University in Shanghai, Professor C. S.
Juju C. S. Wang of the National Tsing Hua University in Taiwan, Professor
Shiba Yoshinobu now at the Tōyō Bunko and the International Christian
University in Tokyo, my Australian colleague Professor Warren Wan-kuo Sun,
and my former co-author and continuing friend Dr Su Ninghu, who has now
moved back to Australia after working for the government in New Zealand. I
cannot any longer recall even the names of all the bookshops in the Kanda in
Tokyo and in Kyoto where I have bought books in Japanese, but they have been
an irreplaceable resource. I would also like, however blurred the focus may
have become with the passage of time, to record my gratitude to them, and
likewise to Heffers of Cambridge (now taken over by Blackwells) for Englishlanguage items.
Fifth, I owe a permanent debt for the intellectual stimulation provided by
academic colleagues too numerous to mention individually, but most commonly
at research conferences. I would like therefore at least to express my appreciation
to those who organized the most important of these meetings, sometimes
in times now long past. To Bill Skinner, whose conference more than thirty
years ago on the Chinese city in late-imperial China helped crystallize my interest
in the study of historical hydraulics. To Dwight Perkins, whose conference
on China’s modern economy in historical perspective stimulated my reexamination of late-traditional Chinese technology. To Itō Shuntarō and Yasuda
Yoshinori, and the Nichibunken Center, for the great international conference
at Kyoto in 1992 on “Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental
Crisis.” To Hsiung Ping-chen of the Academia Sinica in Taipei for suggesting that
Professor Liu Ts’ui-jung and I organize a conference on China’s environmental
history, and to Dr Li Yih-yuan and the Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation for paying
for most of it. To Alan Macfarlane of King’s College, Cambridge, whose workshops on the history of science and technology in comparative perspective have
been a source of many fruitful insights. To Rick Edmonds, the then editor of
the China Quarterly, for the conference early in 1998 on China’s environmental
problems. To Kaoru Sugihara for the environmental history panel at the 1999

Acknowledgments

xi

conference on economic history in Kyoto, and visits to other Japanese universities; and, ﬁnally, to Jack Goldstone of the University of California at Davis for his
multifaceted conference in the fall of 1999 on almost every conceivable topic of
interest to economic and environmental historians, with a particularly strong
emphasis on China. I garnered a wealth of ideas and details from friends, and
others, who participated in these gatherings, and hope they will excuse my not
mentioning them one by one. They provided many seeds and grafts for the
garden of intellect.
Sixth, I think it proper to express gratitude to those institutions that
have kept me ﬁnancially alive and helped me pay my family’s bills. My thanks,
then, to the universities of Cambridge and Glasgow, where in earlier days I
taught Chinese history and economic history. To Harvard, where I enjoyed a
total of three valuable years as a visiting fellow thanks to the HarknessCommonwealth Foundation and the support of the late John Fairbank; and to
the University of Oxford, and St Antony’s College, where I taught from 1973 to
1989. More especially, though, to the École Normale Supérieure, in the rue
d’Ulm, Paris, where I was invited by Marianne Bastid-Brugière, and gave my
ﬁrst course on the environmental history of China, as the ﬁrst holder of the
Chaire Européenne, in 1993; and to the Research School of Paciﬁc and Asian
Studies in the Australian National University in Canberra, where I was able to
set up the Project on the Environmental History of China and Japan during
the Directorship of Professor R. Gerard Ward.
Finally, there are a handful of special individuals from whom I have learned
more than casually over the years. Among these are those with whom I have
collaborated on papers, notably Su Ninghu, hydrologist extraordinary, and
Zhang Yixia, the microbiologist and expert in public health. Richard Grove, for
ﬁve years at the Australian National University’s Research School of Social
Sciences, and founding editor of the journal Environment and History, proved
a constant source of new contacts and perspectives. Basia Zaba, of the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and Griff Feeney, then at the
East–West Center in Hawaii, were indispensable guides through technical
demography, though most of this has proved too complex to include in the
present book. Doug Whaite, formerly of the Coombs Computing Unit, gave
crucial assistance with the computing as I taught myself how to write
programs again. Professor Liu Ts’un-yan and Chiang Yang-ming (Sam Rivers)
gave irreplaceable assistance with difﬁculties in translation. Help with particular technical details in this book was also kindly provided by Georges Métailié
of the Laboratory of Ethno-Botany in Paris, and by Ian Williams of the
Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University. Indispensable
generosities.

xii

Acknowledgments

My wife, Dian Montgomerie, artist, ceramist, photographer, and lifelong
amateur naturalist, has constantly helped train my eye as an observer, brought
serious amateur expertise to problems in the identiﬁcation of Chinese plantnames, and done her valiant best to absorb the strains endured by her husband
working in a still-great but threatened institution that was for a long time in a
state of both government-imposed and internal managerial stress. To her no
thanks can ever be enough.
Gratitude, too, to my elder son, Dr John Elvin of Cambridge Antibody Technologies, for reminding me, whenever I seemed to be in danger of forgetting
it, that micro-organisms are the foundation of everything. And to Charles, my
younger son, for his acute insights into the realities of power.
The last ﬁne-tuning of this work was done at the Sinologisches Seminar of
Heidelberg University, under the kindly auspices of Professor Rudolf Wagner,
where I gave a course of lectures based on the draft chapters, and reaped many
small but critical corrections. My warmest thanks to him and Cathie, and to all
who came and listened.
Finally, I should like to express my warm appreciation of the way in which
Robert Baldock and Diana Yeh and their colleagues at Yale University Press
have looked after the editing and production of this book with a combination
of high speed and painstaking attention, and Barry Howarth, formerly of the
Australian National University, has taken care of the complex index.
Mark Elvin
Tarago, New South Wales and Heidelberg, 2003

Permissions

Parts of the following chapters have either appeared in previous publications
or have drawn substantially from the material in them:
Chapter 5: M. Elvin, “The environmental legacy of imperial China.” China
Quarterly 156. (Dec.), 1998. Also in book form in R. L. Edmonds, ed., Managing
the Chinese Environment. Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2000.
Chapter 6: M. Elvin and N. Su, “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic factors in the changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay, circa
1000–1800.” Environment and History 1.1 (Feb.), 1995; and id., “Engineering the
sea: Hydraulic systems and pre-modern technological lock-in in the
Harngzhou Bay area circa 1000–1800.” In Itō Suntarō and Yoshida Yoshinori,
eds., Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental Crisis. International
Research Center for Japanese Studies: Kyoto, 1995.
Chapter 6: M. Elvin and N. Su, “Action at a distance: The inﬂuence of the
Yellow River on Hangzhou Bay since ad 1000.” In M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds.,
Sediments of Time: Environment and Society in Chinese History. Cambridge
University Press: New York, 1998.
Part of chapters 7, 8, and 9: M. Elvin, “Blood and statistics: Reconstructing
the population dynamics of late imperial China from the biographies of
virtuous women in local gazetteers.” In H. Zurndorfer, ed., Chinese Women in
the Imperial Past: New Perspectives. Brill: Leiden, 1999.
Chapter 10 was presented to the conference at Rheine in March 2000 on
“Das Naturverständnis in China und Europa vom 6. Jh. v.u.Z. bis zum 17 Jh.”
organized by Professor Günter Dux and Professor Hans Ulrich Vogel.
Chapter 11: M. Elvin, “The man who saw dragons: Science and styles of
thinking in Xie Zhaozhe’s Fivefold Miscellany.” Journal of the Oriental Society of
Australia 25 and 26, 1993–4.

xiv

Permissions

Chapter 12: M. Elvin, “Who was responsible for the weather? Moral meteorology in late-imperial China.” Osiris 13 (1998), issue entitled “Beyond Joseph
Needham,” ed. Morris Low. Published by the University of Chicago Press.
Chapter 12: M. Elvin, “The bell of poesy: Thoughts on poems as information
on late-imperial Chinese environmental history.” In S. Carletti, M. Sacchetti,
and P. Santangelo, eds., Studi in Onore di Lionello Lanciotti. Istituto Universitario Orientale: Napoli, 1996.
Permission to use this material is gratefully acknowledged.
Special thanks, too, to Dr Wen Rongsheng, son and literary executor of the
late Dr Wen Huanran, and the Chongqing Publishing House for their kind
permission to use materials from the latter’s Studies on Changes in Plants and
Animals in China during Historical Times (1995) on which the map of ‘The
Retreat of the Elephants’ in Chapter 2 is to a great extent based.

Conventions

Double quotation marks are normally only used in the main text to indicate
direct quotation from an identiﬁed source, the emphasis being on the fact of
citation. Single quotation marks are used for all other purposes, notably for
picking out a term or phrase that is the topic of discussion, either semantically
or in a literal sense, or else is being used with an unusual meaning.
Other uses of double quotes include the demarcation of the titles of individual poems in the main text, and of journal articles in the bibliography, as
well as the indication of direct speech in dialog. As usual, embedded use of
multiple quotation marks requires an alternation of the two types for clarity.
Single quotes are used to demarcate the titles of chapters within a book and
of sections within an article, written by a single author. For collections of
chapters by different hands, the chapters are treated as ‘articles’, and demarcated by double quotes.
All italics in passages translated from Chinese sources have been added for
emphasis by the present author, and this fact is not noted in individual cases.
The omission of lines or verses in translated poems is marked by ‘. . .’
following the ﬁnal word and stop of the extract presented, and is sometimes
on the same line, to save space.

Introductory Remarks

This book is an overview of the environmental history of China. The span
covered is about four thousand years, but weighted toward the last thousand.
The main reason for this is the greater availability of relevant materials for the
more recent period.1 It is based on the ﬁndings of other scholars, Chinese,
Japanese, and Western, and on my own researches. These include historical
geography, local histories, poetry touching the environment, systems of belief
about and representations of nature, local demography, and water-control
systems.
The ﬁrst aim is to sketch the factual record, so far as we know it at present.
The second is to try to resolve a problem. Why did human beings here interact
with the rest of the natural world in the way that they did? And, more tentatively, to what extent was it distinctive?
There are three main sections. Patterns gives the general picture, including
the retreat of the elephants that contributes the title. Broadly speaking, their
long retreat, from the northeast to the southwest, was the reversed image in
space and time of that of the economic development and environmental transformation of premodern China. The central story, long-term deforestation
and the removal of the original vegetation cover, is outlined in the two chapters that follow, more descriptively than analytically. But a core contention is
documented, that classical Chinese culture was as hostile to forests as it was
fond of individual trees.
The next two chapters look at two key questions. What were the original
social driving forces and then the economic forces, behind the longterm environmental transformations of China, both constructive and destructive? Conversely, how did these environmental transformations, especially

xviii

Introductory Remarks

water-control engineering on an often immense scale, interact with economic
growth, and with social and political institutions? I argue that the foundation
of the answer to the ﬁrst lies in a form of cultural social darwinism: cultures
that actively exploited nature tended to gain a military and political competitive advantage over those that did not. I hypothesize that much later, once
premodern economic growth had reached the point where money could be
securely invested at interest, natural resources then came under a further pressure: a resource, such as a tree, that was not utilized economically appeared as
income foregone. This is labeled ‘the cash-in imperative’.
A chapter on water control then follows up the story of the state-driven
aspect of growth through the imperial period. Hydraulic enterprise moved
from a mix of impressive early successes and some massive failures, along a
curve of steadily improving technology, toward an eventual form of environmentally constrained premodern technological lock-in. That is, once a large
system had been established, it became the foundation of a local optimum that
could not be easily abandoned because of the threat to livelihood and even
lives. It was incapable of being much further developed after a certain point,
and its hydrological instability incurred a perpetual burden of maintenance
that made heavy social and economic demands. The long-term opportunity
cost of this achievement was high when seen in a wider perspective.
The second main section, Particularities, presents the environmental histories of three contrasting regions. It focuses on the impact of development by
smaller-scale units, communities, family farms, manors, and religious institutions, all of them increasingly oriented economically by the magnetic-like
ﬁelds of the multicentered competitive market system. One region, Jiaxing on
the central east coast, illustrates what is perhaps the major pattern of
premodern Chinese economic growth from a profusion of ecological riches to
a resource-strained complex of ultra-intensive garden-farming and handicrafts that placed an all-but intolerable workload on working people. The
second, Guizhou in the southwestern interior, shows Chinese colonialism and
imperialism at work on a Han/non-Han environmental frontier. The last,
Zunhua on the old northeastern border, explores a still relatively resource-rich
underdeveloped area and the negative correlation between premodern
economic growth and some indices of well-being, such as the expectation of
life, which was longer here than in the more ‘advanced’ regions.
Each had different population dynamics. People, or at least adults, lived
longer in northern backward Zunhua than in subtropical colonial Guiyang,
the capital of Guizhou, and longer in Guiyang than in advanced east-coast
Jiaxing. Technical difﬁculties make presenting new results in population
history unattractive in a general book like this. It is critical, though, for the

Introductory Remarks

xix

reader to be aware of the trend of recent ﬁndings on fertility, including those
of James Lee and his collaborators, of Zhao Zhongwei, and of my own team,
still partly unpublished. The key point on which we broadly agree, though
with nuanced differences, is that at least by late-imperial times the pace of
childbearing within marriage was slowed down by a spacing of births. In our
view this was ﬁrst and foremost the consequence of a longish infertile period
following the live birth of a child. The reasons, in our view, were principally a
mix of post-birth amenorrhea, prolonged lactation, coitus interruptus, and
social restraints on intercourse imposed by convention. Female infanticide
must also have played a part, though how big a one is still open to serious
debate. Methods of contraception and abortion were likewise known but are
rather unlikely to have had a decisive quantitative impact. Life expectancy,
though it varied from place to place, was too high—sometimes reaching over
forty—for the death rate alone to have kept population growth within environmentally sustainable bounds. There was virtually universal marriage
among women, and the majority of them married at close to the age of seventeen, prior to the peak period of natural fertility, which occurs at about twenty.
Restraint within marriage must have existed; the direct evidence strongly
suggests that it did; its pattern over the years of marriage, especially with relation to the effects of parity (the number of children born) and parental
gender-preferences, and with regard to its mechanisms, awaits further
clariﬁcation though a beginning has been made. Overall, there was indeed, as
is commonly thought, population pressure on resources, especially during the
later empire as easily exploitable space ﬁlled up. But it was moderated by long
evolved customs, and a measure of conscious awareness and appropriate
action. As Lee has stressed, China was not ‘Malthusian’, in any usual sense of
this overused, often hazy, but still evocative word. Chinese environmental
history was not just driven by a helpless subservience to the excessive replication of human beings.2
Subtler, more fugitive, patterns are also sketched in these pages. How individual landscapes were brought under conceptual, religious, and aesthetic
control. Cartography, shrines and temples, myths, legends, and landscape
poetry. How communications consolidated communities, as by the millennial
proliferation of new bridges. They detail local interactions with microfauna—
epidemics and diseases like malaria. With macrofauna such as tigers, both the
eaters of men and increasingly their prey. The use of raptors for hunting. And
local plants, whether domesticated or wild, or imported from the New World
and elsewhere. The differing degrees to which the ancient environmental buffers
against natural disasters disappeared, diminished, or endured. Even how
patterns of war and criminal activity were shaped by the natural environment

xx

Introductory Remarks

and its man-made transformations. Overall they combine to deﬁne the envelope of possible variations in relationships between humans and their habitat
that were recognizably ‘Chinese’.
Perceptions follows. How did the Chinese understand, and value the natural
world in which they lived? This section consists of three essays that illuminate
different aspects of this immense subject. The ﬁrst asks, how did ‘Nature’
become a theme for art in and of itself,3 even the focus of what I call an
‘unavowed religion’? The second, how did Chinese protoscientiﬁc ideas condition their observation of the natural world? Sober, sharp-witted and educated
people saw dragons in this age, sometimes collectively. Why? The third
explores how Chinese understanding of the environment interacted with
orthodox morality, and why favorable or unfavorable weather was seen as a
message of Heaven’s approval or disapproval. It then goes on to ask, what was
the spectrum of personal emotional attitudes toward Nature that had developed toward the end of the imperial era? The case is argued that there was by
this time no such thing as a single ‘Chinese’ view of nature.
The original conception of this book was that it would conclude by looking
at the development of environmental practice and policy under the Nationalist Republic and in the People’s Republic of China. Reluctantly, I have come
to the view that this has to be a separate enterprise. The stage is no longer
China but the world, and modern science has transformed the technology,
both for good and for ill. The short ﬁnal chapter, ‘Concluding Remarks’, therefore only offers some speculations on the nature of economic pressure on an
environment and on how to compare late-imperial China with northwestern
Europe on the eve of ‘modernity’.
Given this prospectus, two questions require answers at once. What is environmental history? And, why China in particular?
‘Environmental history’ in the sense used here is limited to the period for
which documentary evidence exists to give us access to how men and women
were thinking. Its theme is the changing relationship between people and the
biological, chemical, and geological systems that both supported them and
threatened them in complex ways. In speciﬁc terms: climates, rocks and
minerals, soils, water, trees and plants, animals and birds, insects, and, at the
foundation of almost everything, microbes. All of these are in various ways
both vital friends and, at times, lethal enemies. Technologies, economies, social
and political institutions, as well as beliefs, perceptions, knowledge, and representations interacted continually with this natural context. Human systems
had their own dynamics to some extent, but they cannot be fully understood
over time without reference to their environment. The history of disease is a

Introductory Remarks

xxi

major, and regrettable, lacuna in this book. China suffered from some huge
epidemics,4 but reliable knowledge of what was happening is extremely patchy
before the last two hundred years or so,5 and I have not had the time to give
the subject the attention it deserves.
China is an important historical case for three reasons. First, it has an
unusually long record which allows tentative answers to many questions that
are hard to answer for other areas. Second, it complements, and contrasts with,
the environmental histories of other major countries and peoples.6 It often
provides a critical analytical challenge when testing any general theory mostly
formulated in some other context. And, last, it provides a perspective in which
to examine the developing environmental crisis in the People’s Republic of
China today, the origins of which predate modern times.
Nonetheless, some comments and a word of warning on speciﬁc comparisons. The Chinese environmental story is a rich source of apparent parallels
and divergences with its Western and other counterparts. Differences in the
sequences and the prima facie connections of approximately similar elements
raise important questions about the commonly assumed causalities. Thus the
Chinese from early times, if not the earliest, found a religious and philosophical exaltation in the ascent of mountains and their contemplation, whereas
these were only occasionally explored and admired in the classical West, and
mostly abhorred or ignored during the Western Middle Ages. Thus the association of a kind of growing secular religious absorption in the Alps and other
mountains with the Enlightenment and the burgeoning of the mentality that
we think of as ‘modern’ in the West may be correct in chronological terms; it
cannot be adequate in the kind of causation that it implies.7 In at least approximative terms the phenomenon existed without these correlates in premodern
China. Speaking with more ﬁnesse we may say that issues like this reveal the
decisive analytical importance of how we choose to deﬁne an adequate
‘approximation’ to similarity.
Mountains in early medieval China were the home of beneﬁcent magic and
of beings who transcended ordinary humanity. Thus Cao Zhi, who ﬂourished
at the beginning of the third century ce wrote of Mount Tai:8
I roamed the Mountain in the dawn,
Secluded in its misty depths,
When suddenly I met two boys
With faces that were fair and fresh.
They gave me herbs of the immortals
The Numinous Supreme had made,

xxii

Introductory Remarks

Medicaments that when absorbed
Revive the seminal essence and brain,
So life, like a rock’s or metal ore’s,
Passes through eons, but does not age.
Du Fu in the eighth century, having climbed the same mountain, experienced
in a more abstract and philosophical way the especial gift of mountains, ‘the
unity of Heaven and mankind’, as the conventional phrase had it:9
What, then, is this — the greatest of mountains’ — nature?
Greens, far below, over Qi and Lu, reach endlessly away,
Up here are daemonic beauties, gathered by the Reshaper,
Where the Two Forces — dark, bright — split apart sunlight and shade.
This second poem expresses a mood that has something in common with the
modern Western impulse to search for a kind of immanent transcendence in
the contemplation of high mountains, but if we survey the full range of
Chinese beliefs and feelings, we also ﬁnd much that is different. An example is
the search for immortals who possessed, and might bestow, the magical keys
to physical longevity. The ‘Reshaper’ mentioned in the second poem, it should
be noted, is not a creator but a continuous transforming power.10 The ‘Two
Forces’ are the yin and the yang, negative and positive, female and male, soft
and hard. ‘Daemonic’—Chinese shen—suggests forces neither intrinsically
favorable or unfavorable to human beings, simply supernatural. The metaphysics underlying perception is thus quite different from that in the West.
So the question remains: how far are we justiﬁed in seeing the medieval
Chinese passion for mountains and the early modern European passion as
sufﬁciently comparable to justify more than casual comparison? Our sense of
the possible difference is heightened when we recall that the ﬁrst ascent of Le
Mont Blanc, by Horace Bénédict de Saussure, was primarily motivated by
scientiﬁc inquiry and a need to make measurements.11 The destiny of the Alps
was however soon to become, in Nicolas Giudici’s words, “a theater of fabulous
exploits,”12 that fostered the sport of pitting oneself against extremes, and a cult
of records and Promethean supermen. As recounted in the chapter on ‘Science
and Superfauna’ in Perceptions, there may have been the faintest echoes of some
of this in China: Xie Zhaozhe at the end of the sixteenth century seems to have
made a kind of mental catalog of the most dangerous places that he had experienced in a lifetime of traveling in the mountains, but felt no sense of embarrassment in mentioning that his fear had inhibited him from proceeding
through the most dangerous of them all—even though there was still a path of
sorts. The young serf who did make it across, trembling, though thought worth

Introductory Remarks

xxiii

a brief mention, was not seen as the prototype of future heroes. In cases like
this, the complexities of analysis rapidly become hard to disentangle.
Even so, much of what appears in the chapters that follow has been written
with the shadowy presence of possible Western analogies and differences at the
back of my mind. This is especially true of those relating to perceptions. The
obvious Western counterpart—though it is a much richer tapestry—to the
story I outline is Clarence Glacken’s Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and
Culture in Western Thought from Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth
Century.13 Perhaps the most overpowering contrast is the virtual absence in
premodern China of the idea of a transcendent creator God who is distinct
from Nature in a fundamental qualitative sense. The Chinese had notions of a
supreme god in various guises (that is, ‘hypatotheism’),14 and also, as we have
seen, of a somewhat demiurge-like ‘transformer’ constantly reshaping the
cosmos.15 They also conceived of abstract forms, either moral-material principles inhering in different types of entities16 or dynamic patterns that both
embodied and directed the sequences of situations.17 But none of these set up
the Western question of the divine design of the universe that is the ﬁrst of
Glacken’s three major themes, nor, broadly speaking, any of the nagging
Western problems of cosmic purpose, ﬁnal causes, or teleology. Whether this
immense difference in perception led to any major differences between the
human transformations of the environment—such as long-term deforestation—is an interesting issue. My provisional answer, for what it is worth, is ‘no’
or, at least, ‘in no immediately obvious way’.
One of the persistent themes of this book is in fact that the relationships
between how the environment was perceived and represented, as well as the
approach to it that was proclaimed as appropriate, on the one hand, and what
was actually happening, on the other, were always to some degree problematic.
The second can never be simply inferred from the ﬁrst. Sometimes it may even
have been approximately the opposite, a question looked at in the ﬁrst chapter
in Perceptions, in the context of the discussion of the ideas of Heiner Roetz
who ﬁrst ﬂagged this issue in its acute form.
Another key problem that needs resolution is that we are still some way from
having a plausible precise conception of the environmental exploitation characteristic of premodern China that both includes its wide internal range of variation and neither blurs, nor ignores, these differences. I think there was a
distinctively ‘Chinese’ style to the ‘premodern economic growth’ that gradually,
and with some notable regressions followed by renewed advances, as well as
periods of temporary imbalance, took over the transformation of the environment from the original politically and militarily driven onslaught described in
the chapter ‘The Logic of Short-term Advantage’. But a fully satisfactory

xxiv

Introductory Remarks

deﬁnition remains to be determined. For the time being we might formulate it
roughly as follows: Structurally the Chinese style was based on a capacity to
operate through highly disaggregated units (like the peasant family farm)
that could be coordinated either administratively (as for middle-sized and
large water-control operations) or commercially (mostly through networks
of markets that were, with some important qualiﬁcations, free of monopolistic
control) to form, where needed, enormous modular aggregates that were
inherently transient, existing only while immediately required. It is my suspicion that this combination of small-unit initiative and all but unlimited facultative aggregation (either administratively or commercially based) produced a
thoroughness of environmental exploitation that was distinctive in the
premodern world.18
One of the objectives of the three chapters in Particularities on economic
development in a speciﬁc environmental context in contrasting areas is to
show how elusive the formal deﬁnition of a coherent ‘Chinese’ premodern
style still is. It is in fact even possible to demonstrate a signiﬁcant degree of
microvariation in economic relations with the environment within the catchment of a single large lake. My colleagues and I have recently shown that this
was the case for the northern and western shores of Lake Erhai in western
Yunnan province.19 From about the middle of the eighteenth century, once the
clearance of hillslope surface vegetation for farming had got under way in the
upper reaches of the Miju River at the northern end of the lake, the lower river
was burdened with so heavy a load of sediment that a massive mobilization of
labor was needed each year to contain it by dredging and diking, and a huge
protective deﬂection barrage had to be created at the terminus of the upper
river, where the ﬂow was concentrated into a gorge. By the end of the eighteenth century, the river dikes rose several meters above the roofs of the houses
outside them. The system was perilous and only sustainable at a substantial
cost, and by maximal coordination. In contrast, on the west side, irrigation
water was drawn from eighteen small streams ﬂowing down over often overlapping alluvial fans at the foot of an abrupt range of mountains. They were
tapped by a network of small channels that anastomatosed and were even
made to run across each other in places. The courses of these could be changed
or allowed to change whenever they became ﬁlled up with sediments, and little
damage was done by this to life or livelihood. No large-scale organization was
required, and the system was sustainable without great effort. It would be a
mistake to regard either of these systems as more ‘Chinese’ than the other.
Both, and many other types, need to be catered for in any analytical formulation. In summary, before we go deeply into comparisons of ‘China’ with
other parts of the world in terms of its premodern transformation of its

Introductory Remarks

xxv

environment, interesting though these can be, we need to have a much surer
hold on what ‘China’ itself was.
For these reasons, external comparisons are not a major concern of this book.
A few words on my own attitude to the subject may help readers allow for bias
on my part:
I am a historian by training, but with enough knowledge of some areas of
science to have collaborated with professional scientists. I believe that sufﬁcient
objectivity in historical work is possible to make it reasonable to try to distinguish between more plausible and less plausible reconstructions of the past. I
am aware that people in different times and cultures have lived, and live, in
different conceptual worlds. I have even written a book on this subject.20 The
barriers between these worlds are not absolute, however, but semipermeable.
With effort and care one can learn to move between them. This is not fundamentally different from the ‘bootstrapping’ process by which a child learns
his or her own culture as he or she grows up. Only the multiple perspectives in
the mind of the outsider create an element of unavoidable dissimilarity.
More importantly, it can be demonstrated that there is no necessity for
evidence from another time or culture to be ﬂawed by this otherness to the
point of being unusable by us. Medieval Chinese maps of coastlines long ago
vanished can be shown on occasion to match well with modern remotesensing images where differences in reﬂectance can pick out a similar pattern.21
Ages at death of ‘virtuous’ women recorded in premodern Chinese local histories, in random sequence over the centuries, fall, when reassembled, into the
smooth curves of age-speciﬁc mortality familiar to modern demography but
unknown to those doing the recording.22 Historical sources may be disconcertingly partial in coverage. They may offer a view that seems to us distorted.
But they are not just apologias for the power of those who compiled them. Nor
are they just mirrors that reﬂect only our own faces, and nothing but our own
prejudices, back at ourselves.
Immersing oneself in another mental world can also provide a vantage
point from which to look at one’s own mental world from the outside. The
inﬂuences are not all one-way.
Following a personal preference, I have quoted more from original sources
than is usual in an introductory survey. There are two purposes in this, apart
from the fact that premodern Chinese is on the whole hard to translate, and a
reliable translation in itself a service. The ﬁrst is to illustrate the kind of
evidence on which the story told here, and my analyses, are based. It is thin by
the standards of the present day, even if abundant compared to that for our

xxvi

Introductory Remarks

own Western medieval and ancient history. Quotation of sources also allows
the reader some opportunity to conceptualize the evidence differently. The
second purpose is to make it possible for him or her to enter, even if only for
a moment or two, into the mental world of those who made the history examined in these pages. To acquire, as it were, a second, and imaginary, self.
My own environmental values are probably close to those expressed by Aldo
Leopold in his Sand County Almanac half a century ago:23
Wild things, I admit, had little human value until mechanization assured us
of a good breakfast, and until science disclosed the drama of where they
came from and how they live. The whole conﬂict thus boils down to a question of degree. We of the minority see a law of diminishing returns in
progress; our opponents do not.
I would be happy to be able to maintain this type of balance and to combine
practicality and poetry in the way that he did. Readers who ﬁnd themselves at
odds with these views, from whichever side, catastrophist or cornucopian,
should make allowances as appropriate.
This can be put another way. While patterned catastrophe rules sand piles
and stock markets,24 I am inclined to believe that, at a historical level, life is
mostly logistic. That is, from time to time a near-equilibrium state springs into
an accelerating growth, but after a time this acceleration slows down and
vanishes, the system returning to a new near-equilibrium.25 This puts me
philosophically closer to biologists and demographers than to orthodox economists, but it is always possible to argue about which part of the curve one is
on. The initial section of a logistic looks exponential.
Literate Chinese wrote poems constantly, and on a wider variety of themes than
educated Westerners, often very mundane themes. Poems are as a consequence
used more frequently in the chapters that follow than is common in Western
historical writing. They often contain information not available elsewhere. This
is why they are included, not for their impact on the heart. It is nonetheless
necessary to remember that they are literature. They have a character that is
partly deﬁned by the particular genre they are written in, by particular conventions of imagery and symbolism, and by a framework of reference to other
literary works familiar to their readers. They are not simply—indeed, not at all
simply—reﬂections of the human and natural environments of their time.
Even compared to depending on more ordinary historical texts, which have
their own conventions, too, and are rarely only what they purport to be on the
surface, the use of poems is hazardous; but it is unavoidable.

Introductory Remarks

xxvii

Most of the originals rhymed. Premodern Chinese poems generally do,
apart from those—with a few exceptions—in the genre of rhapsodic ‘prosepoems’ or fu. This feature is hinted at in the translations given here by vowelrhymes on the ﬁnal stressed syllable of each line. Older Chinese poems also
have a crystalline regularity of syllabic structure, usually with a break of some
sort in, or near, the middle of each line. This regularity is not reproducible as
a rule in polysyllabic English, but I have tried to suggest the breaks, at times
marking the dividing caesura with a ‘—’ dash. The free-ﬂoating unrhymed
English lines pioneered by Arthur Waley, and more or less imitated by most
translators ever since, however good (or bad) in their own right, misrepresent
the sonic and metrical nature of historical Chinese mainstream poetry almost
as totally as it is possible to do so.
Here, as an illustration of the conventions I have adopted, are the opening
lines of Ji Qiguang’s “Farming Women,” probably written in the later seventeenth century.26 The rhyming vowels are in bold, and all the midline breaks
shown by a ‘—’, which normally only needs to be done when the pause is not
obvious:
On a road beside the Huai River — I met with some farming women.
They stood barefoot, with unkempt hair — on the rising slope of a ridge.
Pointing to where the sun was setting — they told me, a stranger, their
history:
“Up there, in the western Huai valley — land and climate have always
brought bitterness.
“Only here and there are there farmable patches. — It’s an arid waste,
short of streams,
Even if it produced Han Xin long ago — who helped found the Han in
their glory.
The wind there howls for three hundred miles. — Rice in the ﬁelds is
infrequent,
Though on the vein-like upland ridges — grows many a plot of sorghum.”
This is a powerful evocation of one of the most degraded landscapes of lateimperial times. It is material like this that, more than any other, enables one to
build up, fragment by fragment, a picture of particular places at particular
times.
The most difﬁcult practical obstacle to assimilating Chinese history for those
who are not Chinese speakers is one that is, paradoxically, both trivial and all
but insurmountable. This is remembering Chinese names of people and places.

xxviii

Introductory Remarks

Much of the difﬁculty is the result of the transcription into identical roman
letters of Chinese syllables that have different pitch-tones when spoken, and
different ideographs when written, and of course different meanings. Where
necessary, I have put in accents to indicate the different tones. Thus Zhòu (in the
falling tone) was the ‘evil’ last ruler of the Shang dynasty, and the Zhou (in
the unmarked level tone) the dynasty that overthrew the Shang. The acute accent
shows the rising tone, and the inverted circumﬂex the dipping-rising tone.
The most commonly used transcription, and the one adopted in this book,
pinyin, also seems to put mental barbed wire in the way of most Englishspeaking readers. The worst letters are the ‘q’ pronounced as ‘ch’ and the ‘c’
pronounced as ‘ts’ as in the English ‘cheats’, and the ‘x’ pronounced as ‘sh’ as in
‘she’, and the ‘zh’ pronounced like the ‘j’ in ‘Joe’. Ignoring for a moment that
Chinese does not have a ﬁnal ‘c’, we could say that, with pinyin vowels, ‘she
cheats Joe’ would be written as ‘xi qic zhou’. The noninitiated may be forgiven
for ﬁnding this grotesque. I have therefore tried to put nonessential Chinese
names in the notes or leave them out where possible.
The plain inverted comma is used when the break between two transcribed
vowels or syllables is not unambiguous. ‘Xian’ (one syllable) means ‘a county’,
but ‘Xi'an’ (two syllables) is the city. The province names ‘Hu'nan’ and ‘He'nan’
are therefore properly written with the inverted comma, as ‘hun'an’ and
‘hen'an’ are both permissible pinyin readings.
Converting historical Chinese measures of length, capacity, and weight is
more a problem for the author than for readers. In general, where a precise
equivalent is important, I have relied mainly on Qiu Guangming’s Researches
on Measures of Length, Capacity, and Weight in Successive Dynasties in China27
which is based on modern measurements of actual surviving measuring
devices. These vary signiﬁcantly among themselves, even for the same epoch,
but in most cases a reasonable central value can be established. Normally I use
the metric system, but a partial exception has been to allow myself ‘miles’
rather than the equivalent in ‘kilometers’ where a precise distance is of no great
concern, and the old word comes more easily off the tongue. Likewise, and in
the same sort of contexts, I sometimes use ‘feet’ and ‘inches’ which are close to
their Chinese counterparts.
I have tried to reduce scholarly clutter to a minimum. Thus square brackets
have been removed from obvious and necessary interpolations in translations.
Additional information about locations, dates, peoples, technical terms, and
commentaries on problems, has mostly been put in endnotes.
Bon voyage!

Patterns

1
Landmarks and Time-marks

The environmental history of China covers a varied space. The core is about
1,000 miles east to west and 1,200 miles north to south. Readers not already
familiar with Chinese geography need points of reference if they are to place
stories and analyses in a context.
A ﬁrst approximation is given in the accompanying schematic map. This
shows present-day China’s ten main regions simpliﬁed almost, but not quite,
to the point of caricature. Readers who know China well should glance at it
just long enough to note the deﬁnitions of the regions adopted here, as every
important place-name is followed by a regional label when it ﬁrst appears.
Thus ‘Beijing (Northeast)’ and ‘Shanghai (East)’ show that these two cities are
in the Northeast and East regions respectively. The table appended to Map 1 on
p. 4 shows the major provinces assigned to each region. For a more detailed
treatment of the historical geography, it is useful to have to hand an atlas such
as C. Blunden and M. Elvin, A Cultural Atlas of China.1
The basic social story of ‘China’ is the four-thousand-year expansion of
‘Han’ or ‘Chinese’ population, political power, and culture from their birthplace in the Northwest and Northeast, with secondary centers in the West and
Center, into all the other areas shown, and indeed beyond them.2 There were
times when Han culture temporarily retreated. This was the case for the
Northwest and Northeast from the third to the sixth centuries ce.3 The
temperature was colder in these years, as may be seen from Table 1 on p. 6,
and non-Han, or, in Han terms, ‘barbarian’, peoples swept in from the north,
and the frontier between pasturage and farmed land moved south. During
such times, which included the Mongol conquest, Chinese culture was in
considerable measure assimilated by the conquerors, and when Han political


Major provinces in each zone
Xinjiang (E. Turkestan)
c
Hubei, Hunan, Jiangxi
Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang
e
Anhui, Jiangsu, N. Zhejiang
Shaanxi, Shanxi, Gansu
sw Yunnan, Guizhou, Guangxi
Henan, Hebei, Shandong
fs Guangdong, Hainan
Sichuan
se S. Zhejiang, Fujian, Taiwan

Notes
This diagram is for the purposes of quick reference only and carries no political implications.
The lower Yellow River at some times exited north of the Shandong peninsula, and at others south of it, in both
cases by a variety of routes.
The northern section of the Grand Canal shown here is that used under the Ming and Qing dynasties from the
early ﬁfteenth to the early twentieth century.
Mean annual rainfall starts to increase again with more northerly latitudes in eastern Manchuria.
‘Canton’ is ‘Guangzhou’ and ‘Amoy’ is ‘Xiamen’ in current PRC usage.
indicates topographical barriers to easy movement in historical times.

Map 1 Schematic model of China for rapid reference (not to scale)

Landmarks and Time-marks

5

power re-emerged the end result was frequently an expansion of the Han
socio-political domain. In some marginal areas, like Korea and Vietnam,
Chinese culture was also absorbed, though never entirely, while Chinese political power was to a large degree successfully resisted, in part because of these
acquired cultural skills. The Manchu dynasty, which ruled during the ﬁnal part
of the late-imperial period, from the mid-seventeenth century to the early
twentieth, was in many respects a sino-‘barbarian’ condominium, and its
immense periphery to the north and west was only partially siniﬁed by the
time it fell. Overall, though, the picture is one of Han Chinese expansion up to
natural limits—coasts, steppes, deserts, mountains, and jungles. It was a multimillennial transformation of a variety of habitats by some version of the
Chinese style of settlement: cutting down most of the trees for clearance,
buildings, and fuel, an ever-intensifying garden type of farming and arboriculture, water-control systems both large and small, commercialization, and
cities and villages located as near the water’s edge as possible.
Map 1 also shows the main gradients in space of yearly rainfall and height
above sea level. China on the whole gets wetter as one goes south, and higher as
one goes west. These are only approximations. For example, the lowest point in
the People’s Republic, the Turfan Depression at 154 meters below sea level, lies
in the Far West toward the high end of the rising east-to-west altitude gradient.
Thick grey lines pick out mountain barriers that made communication
difﬁcult in historical times. As can be seen, Chinese space was to some degree
compartmentalized. This was, and is, particularly true of the West, a basin
ringed by mountains and with the Yangzi gorges its only outlet to the sea.
Table 1 likewise provides time-marks for the basic chronological patterns of
Chinese history: millennia, periods, dynasties, and key economic and environmental developments. A minimal set of the most important time-marks is
printed in bold-face type. If they can be remembered, almost everything else
falls into place around them.
Mean annual temperatures as compared to those of the present day are
indicated, as climatic changes seem to have been associated with some of the
major political and cultural turning points. A colder climate accompanied the
end of the archaic world in the later Western Zhou dynasty almost three thousand years bp.4 Colder weather was the accompaniment of the break-up of the
Early Empire in the ﬁrst centuries of the ﬁrst millennium ce. A colder and
often unstable climate was likewise the background to the destruction of the
Middle Empire after the twelfth century ce by the Jürchen and the Mongols,
both non-Han peoples from the north. Conversely, the Middle Empire rose
during the middle of the ﬁrst millennium ce, when the temperature was
warmer than it is today.

6

Patterns

The most likely mechanisms were simple. A shift toward cold and dry
climatic conditions in north China and the grasslands to its north was associated with attempted or successful southward migrations and invasions by
nomadic pastoralists. A shift to warmer and wetter periods was linked with
agricultural Han Chinese re-expansion northward, and sometimes westward.
Pastoralists came south when lowered farm output reduced Chinese logistical
capacity and ability to resist, and drier colder conditions simultaneously put
pressure on them to move by reducing the availability of forage grass north of
the frontier. It is likely that the change of climate was the critical factor:
pastoralists would probably not have had the means to invade successfully if
they had not previously enjoyed reasonably good conditions. For the second
Table 1 Time-marks in Chinese environmental history
Millennia Periods

Major dynasties

Economy*

Climate

2nd bce

Xia/Shang
W. Zhou
E. Zhou
Springs and Autumns†
Warring States
Qin/W. Han

Settled farming
Cities/Bronze
Iron

Much warmer
than today

Archaic
Fragmented

1st bce
Early Empire
1st ce

Early Empire
Fragmented
Middle
Empire

2nd ce

3rd ce

E.Han
Three Kingdoms/W. Jin
Northern and Southern
Dynasties
Sui/Tang
Five Dynasties/N. Song

Large hydraulic
works

Some environmental recovery
Grand Canal
Rice-farming

Colder than
today
Same as
today
Same as today
Colder (Bohai
Gulf freezes)
Warmer than
today

MEDIEVAL ECONOMIC
REVOLUTION
Jürchen/
N. and S. Song
Tea
Cold/variable
Mongols
Jin/Yuan
Cotton
(L. Tai freezes)
Population decline
in NE and NW
Late
Ming
New World crops Cold but
Empire
Manchu/Qing
Rapid population warming
growth
Final-phase PMEG
Environmental degradation
Republic
Some MEG
As today
People’s Republic
Spreading MEG
ACCELERATING ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION

* PMEG, premodern economic growth; MEG, modern economic growth.
†
For reasons I have never understood, English language writers prefer the singular ‘Spring and
Autumn’. The rational French prefer the plural ‘Printemps et Automnes’. See, for example, J. Gernet,
Le Monde chinois (Colin: Paris, 1972). The Chinese term permits either translation.

Landmarks and Time-marks

7

and third of the colder periods shown in Table 1, these correlations can be
documented in some detail.5 Clearly, though, we are talking here of pressures
operating in contexts that, overall, were much more causally complex.
The ‘medieval economic revolution’ referred to in the column on the
‘Economy’ is associated with a southward shift in the center of China’s
economic gravity from the Northeast to the East. It was distinguished by more
productive farming, especially of rice, by better transport, especially on water,
by extensive commercialization, and by the widespread use of money and
written contracts. The populations of its cities at times reached more than a
million. It used woodblock printing, and hence enjoyed increased literacy. It
pioneered the ﬁrst elements of mass production by making millions of castiron arrowheads for its armies, and mechanization, as in the water-powered
spinning of hemp yarn. Although this ‘revolution’, whose impetus later faded
away, was responsible for some environmental degradation, the worst
premodern destruction of habitats, and of forests and soils, actually took place
during the population explosion in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
on the eve of the modern era in China.6
The term ‘ﬁnal-phase PMEG’ refers to the extremely intensive form of
premodern economic growth that developed in the more technically advanced
parts of China toward the end of the imperial age. It was characterized by an
exceptionally high productivity of cereal per hectare (far in excess of that in
Europe before the nineteenth century), and long hours of work almost round
the clock and the year. Ordinary people bore a health-sapping workload and
endured virtually unremitting stress, especially women. Local handicrafts
could often only make a proﬁt if interprovincial market networks functioned
properly; and forest clearances and the eventual complete coverage of the
surface by private property rights removed any signiﬁcant environmental
buffer when society was threatened by extreme events, notably drought. With
the proviso that the other criteria of advanced premodern technology are also
met, it seems that the routine sale of children during economic crises can be
taken as a marker of the onset of this ﬁnal paradoxical stage, one that may be
summarized as ‘productive but precarious’.7 When Shao Changheng in the
later seventeenth century wanted to convey the extreme horror of a famine
near Nanjing, he wrote:8
From Sichuan, and the middle Yangzi, come the rolls of the drums of war.
Downstream, the lower Yangzi is cruelly scarred in its plight.
In previous years, when people were poor, they could sell their sons and
daughters.
This year, if a child’s for sale, there’s nowhere to ﬁnd a buyer.

8

Patterns

In premodern terms, this was one of the most advanced areas in China.
This completes the preliminaries. The map and table are oversimpliﬁed, and
will need ﬁne-tuning in the course of our journey across four millennia. They
are nonetheless needed to hold in place frameworks of space and time during
a discussion that unavoidably moves back and forth across both in what can
be a disconcerting fashion.

2
Humans v. Elephants: The Three
Thousand Years War
Four thousand years ago there were elephants in the area that was later to
become Beijing (in the Northeast), and in most of the rest of what was later to
be China. Today, the only wild elephants in the People’s Republic are those in
a few protected enclaves in the Southwest, up against the border with Burma.
The stages of this long retreat south and west are shown in Map 2, ‘The Retreat
of the Elephants’, which is based on the research of the late Wen Huanran.1
That elephants were abundant in the Northeast, Northwest, and West during
the archaic age is clear from the elephant bones found in Shang and Shu archaeological sites,2 from the cast bronze elephants of this time, and from records on
oracle bones3 that mention elephants being sacriﬁced to the ancestors. Not long
after the start of the ﬁrst millennium bce, however, they were rarely overwintering north of the Huai River on the Northeast/East boundary. By the beginning of the second millennium ce they were conﬁned to the South, and during
the second half of this last millennium increasingly to the Southwest.
What were the causes of this disaster (seen from the elephants’ point of view)?
In part it was likely to have been the cooling of the climate, as referring back to
the last column in Table 1 in the previous chapter will suggest. Elephants do not
resist cold well. But since the elephant population did not recover to more than
a small degree in somewhat warmer periods (such as 700 bce to 200 bce, when
it seems to have moved back north from the Yangzi valley to the line of the Huai
River), and mostly not at all, some other force was at work. The most obvious
explanation is that it was the result of a protracted war with human beings
which the elephants lost. The pattern of their withdrawal in time and in space
was, so to speak, the reverse image of the expansion and intensiﬁcation of
Chinese settlement. Chinese farmers and elephants do not mix.

Map 2 The Retreat of the Elephants (after Wen Huanran)

Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War

11

It is necessary to say ‘Chinese’ here as some non-Han cultures in the Far
South seem to have had a less confrontational relationship. One writer in Tang
times observed of the Manshi ‘barbarians’, who are of Tai stock, that “peacocks
nest in the trees by people’s houses, and the elephants are the size of water
buffalo, the local custom being to rear them to plow the ﬁelds, and, even now,
to burn their dung as fuel.”4
The war against wild animals generally was a deﬁning characteristic of the
early Zhou-dynasty culture from which classical China later emerged. This can
be seen from the Mencius, the book that describes the ideas of Mencius, the
second important thinker in the Confucian tradition. The philosopher lived in
the fourth century bce, and was therefore speaking about events more than
three-quarters of a millennium before his time. What he has to say about the
Duke of Zhou is nonetheless revealing:5
After the sage–rulers Yao and Shun had passed away, the way of the sages fell
into decay. Oppressive monarchs . . . abandoned the farmland to make it
into gardens and hunting enclosures, and as a result the people could not get
clothes or food . . . . As the gardens and hunting enclosures, ponds, lakes,
thickets, and swamps became numerous, the birds and the beasts moved in.
By the reign of Zhòu [the ‘evil’ last sovereign of the Shang dynasty], the
world was once again in great disorder. The Duke of Zhou assisted King Wu
of the Zhou dynasty to destroy Zhòu . . . . He drove the tigers, leopards,
rhinoceroses, and elephants far away, and the world was greatly delighted.
Presumably this applied to the middle and lower valley of the Yellow River
toward the end of the second millennium BCE. We do not have to believe the
details, but can take it as expressing a continuing social memory of an attitude
of mind reﬂecting the struggle to consolidate a farming culture.
The ‘war’ was fought on three fronts. The ﬁrst front was the destruction of
the elephants’ forest habitat by clearing land for farming. One reason we hear
of their intrusions, from time to time even into walled cities, is probably that
they were under pressure from the shrinking of the resources available to
them. The second front was the farmers’ defense of their crops against
elephant trampling and plundering, based on their belief that the security of
the ﬁelds demanded the extermination or capture of the thieves. The third
front was the hunting of elephants for their ivory and their trunks, which were
a gourmet’s delicacy, or their trapping to be trained for war, transport, or
ceremonial. These three fronts can be looked at separately, but in all cases
habitat destruction was the key.
Chinese elephants need a warm and moist environment, without steep
slopes, in which they can avoid direct sunlight and move around easily. The

12

Patterns

ideal is open forest near water or wetlands. They may weigh up to ﬁve tons,
and consume a large quantity of food every day, typically leaves, wild bananas,
and tender bamboo tips. Water is needed not just for drinking but also for
washing in and cooling down. The Book of the Prince of Huainan, a compendium on natural history put together around 120 bce, and infused with a
sense of the power of natural environments to engender speciﬁc living things
and shape them in particular ways, described the southern regions at this time
as “places where the bright–positive aethers6 accumulate, being warm and
moist . . . with land well suited to rice, and having numerous rhinoceroses
and elephants.”7
Elephants reproduce slowly, the gestation of the usual single calf taking
about 1.8 years. It is therefore difﬁcult for them to make good in a short time
losses from slaughter inﬂicted by humans. Nor, in spite of their exceptional
intelligence and memory, do they adapt easily to altered environments. But
they are mobile. It seems unlikely that any other quadruped mammal of the
present day can easily ford or swim rivers the size of the middle reaches of the
Yangzi. Mobility has been a partial substitute for adaptability.
Elephants live in small groups and, in this state, are not normally dangerous
to humans who do not provoke them. The rogue male who has left his group,
or been pushed out of it, is however a serious threat. As one writer observed in
the eleventh century: “There were formerly numerous elephants in the territory of Zhangzhou [in the Southeast], which is next door to Chaoyang [in the
Far South]. They commonly formed herds of somewhat more than ten, but
caused no harm. Only if a solitary elephant met someone would he pursue
him, and trample on him till his bones and ﬂesh were pulverized, before
making off.”8
The crux was that elephants could not survive without tree cover, and its
destruction implied their departure. This can be illustrated from two accounts
of the so-called ‘elephants’ hideouts’ in Wuping, on the border of the Southeast with the Far South. The ﬁrst is from a Song-dynasty writer. “Elephants’
hideouts [he says] were found between Chaozhou [in the Far South] and
Meizhou [on the Far South border with the Southeast] in an area that is at
present under the jurisdiction of Wuping county. In times past, when it had
not yet been opened up for farming, herds of elephants would stop in them
. . . . These days, the land is fertile and harvests abundant.”9 The second is from
a late fourteenth-century local gazetteer for Linding, on the border of the
Southeast with the Far South:
The forest provided a screen overhead and there is an old tradition that
elephants would emerge from the hideouts, hence their name. Later on,

Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War

13

people gradually felled the trees and removed the couch grass. If they found
a place that wrapped around them like a spiral coil [a sort of small sheltered
valley], they would make it into a settlement. Ninety-nine times out of a
hundred these places were once elephants’ hideouts.10
Farmers and elephants were in direct competition for habitat.
Villagers also killed elephants by forcing them to be exposed to direct sunlight. A Ming-dynasty author describes this for the county of Hepu, in the
Southwest, on the coast:
In 1547 a mob of elephants trampled down the common people’s harvests at
Mount Dalian. When chased, they refused to move off. The prefect . . .
induced the most prominent people in the rural district to lead the inhabitants in catching them. Before they began, they fashioned connected tree
trunks into portable barricades. Each of these was ten feet in length and
needed several men to lift. They then waited until the herd of elephants was
hidden behind a small hill, and at once surrounded them on all sides with
the barricades, this being done in the twinkling of an eye. Outside the barricades they made a deep ditch, and encircled it with people holding bows,
arrows, and long spears. The order was given not to let the elephants smash
through the barricades and get away. People were also told to wait for a
moment when they could cut down the trees that grew within the barricades, so the herd could be attacked by the heat of the midday sun. Elephants
are afraid of heat; and in three or four days all of them were dead.11
The devastating effects of an increasingly treeless environment on elephants
could not be brought home more brutally.
Crops were the second point of conﬂict. According to the Song History,
elephants appeared in 962 ce in Huangpo county, which is in the Center, north
of the Yangzi. Here they “hid in the woods and ate the common people’s grain
sprouts and harvests.”12 They did the same in some other areas including
Tangzhou (in the Northeast), which was 140 miles away. This suggests the sort
of distances they moved. The same source says of Chaozhou in 1171 that
“several hundred wild elephants devoured the harvest. The farmers put pit
traps in their ﬁelds. Since the elephants were unable to eat, they led their herd
to encircle carts and horses traveling on the roads. Grain was collected to feed
them, after which they went away.”13
In 991 an auxiliary academician in the Bureau of Military Affairs sent up a
memorial in which he observed that in Leizhou (in the Far South), and other
areas nearby that were on or near the western end of the south coast, “there are
elephants in herds” in “the mountains and forests.” The common people were

14

Patterns

banned from marketing any tusks they obtained, and he proposed that the
local ofﬁcials should pay them half the price. His objective, it seems fair to
guess, was to limit what he called “concealment and illicit dealings with
others.”14 The most likely reason, though, that the peasants made the effort to
get their hands on tusks from time to time was that the returns from the
combination of crop protection and ivory trading made the substantial risks
seem acceptable. This is explicitly spelled out in another report from
Zhangzhou (on the southeast coast), late in the twelfth century ce:
Many of the common folk who won their living among the mountain
gorges had their crops trampled on or eaten by elephants. Some were
capable of snaring pits with crossbows and arrows, and were happy to have
thus rid themselves of the damage; but when the ofﬁcials demanded that
they pay in the feet and the tusks as a tax, this was too much for them. The
common people thereafter preferred to endure damage from the elephants
and did not venture to kill them.
Just recently, when some of them have presented tusks, the prefect has
returned them. He has moreover given orders that families who kill
elephants in the future can keep the tusks for themselves. Since the people
know how to put an end to the harm caused by elephants, changes will be
seen in the deep forests and the spreading footslopes of the hills, and the
crops will ﬂourish.15
It would be interesting to know why tax policy was the decisive factor in
tilting the balance of advantage for farmers here either against, or for, trapping
elephants. Seeing that it is said that they were able, though unhappily, to
coexist with elephants who ravaged their ﬁelds, one suspects that the crucial
factor was the cash from the sale of ivory, not just stopping the loss of harvests.
This brings us to the third front: the economic, military, and ceremonial
uses of elephants. Elephants may have been domesticated in the Northeast in
Shang times, though the evidence is thin.16 They were certainly hunted, though
the numbers seem to have already been low. In the state of Chu, however, in
the middle Yangzi valley, ivory was regarded as a routine product during the
seventh century bce.17 A century later there is a brief account stating that the
ruler of Chu “had torches lashed to elephants to make them rush upon the
army of the state of Wu.”18 In 548 bce, in the course of a rhetorical attack on
the extortion of excessive presents by the ruler of the state of Jin, it was argued
by Zichan, a statesman celebrated for his wisdom and skill, that “Elephants
have tusks that are the cause of their death, since they are offered as presents,”19
though he says nothing about where the ivory comes from. In the West, much
later, in the third century ce, the inhabitants were said to “extract the tusks of

Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War

15

elephants, and do violence to the horns of rhinoceroses.”20 The tusks were
turned into ivory artifacts, like the tablets on which ofﬁcials placed their
papers for writing during imperial audiences; and the rhinoceros horns were
used, ground up, for various medical purposes, especially as an antidote to
poisons. At times the private sale of the tusks was forbidden—for instance, in
the Far South in the late tenth century ce—but there was a black market in
them all the same.21
The trunk was eaten. In Xunzhou and Leizhou (both in the Far South)
around the beginning of the ﬁfth century ce the ﬂavor was said to resemble
that of a piglet. Slightly later, a Tang writer, after noting that there were
“numerous wild elephants” in the Far South, went on to observe that people
“competed to eat their trunks, the taste of which is said to be fatty and crisp,
and to be particularly well suited to being roasted.”22
In most of China the use of elephants in warfare died out in the course of
the ﬁrst millennium bce. The exceptions were the West and Southwest, where
it continued, perhaps intermittently, for almost another two thousand years. In
the early 1370s, the defenders of the city of Chengdu (in the West) used
elephants carrying men in armor against the forces of the founder of the Ming
dynasty, but were routed by the use of ﬁrearms.23 In the Southwest the antiMing resistance did likewise. According to the Ming Veritable Records:
In the third month of 138824 the rebel Si Lunfa mobilized his entire forces of
300,000 men and more than a hundred elephants. He went back to ravage
Dingbian [in the Southwest]. Mu Ying, the Ming general, selected 30,000
brave horsemen to oppose them. The entire horde of ‘bandits’ sallied forth
from their encampment and formed into ranks to await the conﬂict. Their
leaders and senior ofﬁcers all rode on elephants, and the elephants all wore
armor. On their backs they carried ﬁghting towers that resembled screens,
and bamboo tubes hung down both sides, with short spears in them to
prevent thrusts from the side. When the two lines met, the throng of
elephants smashed their way through and continued on forward . . . . The
‘bandit’ horde was heavily defeated. More than half of the elephants
perished and thirty-seven were captured alive.25
Over two hundred years later, the Southwestern resistance to the Manchus
made use of elephants commandeered from the non-Han locals, partly for
military transport. After 1662, however, the curtain falls, and we hear no more
about war-elephants in China.
On the economic uses of elephants in late-imperial times, we can draw—
with cautious care—on Xie Zhaozhe’s Fivefold Miscellany, published in 1608.
This is a collection of reports about natural phenomena and human affairs

16

Patterns

assembled by a connoisseur who was always playing in teasing fashion with his
own and his readers’ sense of what was plausible. He was an ofﬁcial in the
Ministry of Works, becoming an expert in water control, and also served in
Guangxi province (in the Southwest). He is therefore likely to have had some
direct knowledge of what he was writing about in the items that follow.26
The people of Yunnan rear elephants the way those in the heartland of
China rear cattle and horses. They ride them on journeys. They load them
up with grain, and the animals have an exceptionally docile nature. On
occasion they erect frameworks on their backs in which two people can sit
face to face when feasting and drinking. When elephants meet with ceremonial arches, they invariably pass through them on their knees. When they
are going up a hill they kneel on their forelegs, and going downhill they
kneel on their hindlegs, maintaining stability to a greater degree than one
can express.
When, at times, people have been forcibly pillaged by bandits, they have
cried out in desperation to their elephant. This has caused the elephant to
grasp a large tree with the end of his trunk forthwith and to sally out to
battle, at once putting the bandits to ﬂight in disorder.
There are times, though, when rogue elephants kill people. These rogues
are trapped in pits and put to death.
Xie then shifts to the use of trained elephants at the Ming-dynasty Court to
maintain a sort of honor guard outside the audience chamber, and to carry the
imperial insignia. The Chinese Court met, it should be remembered, at a very
early hour in the morning. It was believed that people thought more clearly at
this time of day.
They are used for these purposes not only because of their imposing
appearance, but also because they are mild-mannered and intelligent in a
way that other animals are not. The elephants observe an order of precedence, each one having his designated position and category of fodder to
consume.
Every morning they stand on either side of the Palace gate. Before His
Majesty’s carriage has set out, they wander about at random, munching hay;
but once the bell has sounded and the whips cracked, they line up on each
side with a reverent demeanor. Once all the ofﬁcials have gone in, they stand
with their trunks crossed, and no one ventures to enter by going past them.
When the Court is concluded, they once again resume their normal behavior.
If one of them is ill and cannot take his place in the honor guard, a
mahout will lead him to visit another elephant, and ask the latter to take the

Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War

17

sick one’s place. After this, the other elephant will be willing to do so. If this
procedure is not followed, the second elephant will not go.
If an elephant commits an offense, or injures a human, the imperial
command will be issued for him to be beaten. Two other elephants will twine
their trunks around his feet until the offender topples onto the ground. Only
when the beating has been concluded will he rise to his feet to give thanks for
the favor received, with an attitude just like that of a human being.
If one of them is demoted in rank, he always takes the position in the
honor guard to which he has been demoted. He will not dare to stand where
he was previously accustomed. This is much to be marveled at.
In the sixth lunar month they are bathed and mated. The coupling takes
place in the water with a female who ﬂoats with her face upward, in all
respects like a human being . . . .
Although these beasts are bulky and awkward in nature, and do not have
an elegant shape, they nonetheless possess uncanny intelligence. Thus it is
that many humans are not the equal of animals.
The reader is at liberty to believe as much, or as little, of the details of this
account of bureaucratized pachyderms as he or she feels inclined; but the
underlying point holds good. By late-imperial times, the elephant only
survived in China in what amounted to a ritual circus at the capital, and on the
southwest frontier.27
This sketch is the preliminary approximation of a description of the long-term
human impact on the environment in China since the agricultural revolution
and the early Bronze Age. The retreat of the elephants maps in reverse, both in
space and time, the growth of the Chinese farm economy. More rigorously, the
space dominated by elephants in China was the complement of the space dominated by humans. It also symbolizes the transition, slow at ﬁrst but then accelerating, from an environmental richness counterbalanced by perpetual
dangers from wildlife, to a sedentarized human dominance accompanied by a
relative security from wild animals, but also—at least from the perspective of
an Australian who has lived many years in the bush—an impoverished life of
the senses,28 and a scarcity or disappearance of many of the natural resources
on which humankind had previously existed.
There is another necessary perspective. In some areas the human struggle
against wild animals was a matter of life and death. In the early ﬁrst millennium ce, though the exact period is cloudy, in the lands of the Bai people
around Lake Erhai in western Yunnan there were large pythons—known in
Chinese as mang—that daily devoured not only livestock but also people.

18

Patterns

Surviving accounts have become mythologized, but it is clear that a heroic and
at times desperate struggle was needed to destroy them.29 Only when this had
been done was it safe to farm the fertile lakeshore marshland. One of many
such battles over habitat. The descendants of these pythons survive today on
the eastern side of the Erhai, but much diminished in size and, so far as one
can tell without a special inquiry, in danger.
It is important to balance the awareness of what has been lost by victories
like this against our predators with a robust realization of how much has been
won. Philosophical regrets, inspired by an understanding of our inseparability
from the rest of nature are not mere folly or romanticism. But in cases such as
this they encompass less than half the story.

3
The Great Deforestation:
An Overview
The following poem was written by Liu Zongyuan, a philosopher and essayist
who lived around the turn of the eighth and ninth centuries ce. It symbolizes
the longest story in China’s environmental history:1
The ofﬁcial guardians’ axes have spread through a thousand hills,
At the Works Department’s order hacking rafter-beams and billets.
Of ten trunks cut in the woodlands’ depths, only one gets hauled away.
Ox-teams strain at their traces — till the paired yoke-shafts break.
Great-girthed trees of towering height lie blocking the forest tracks,
A tumbled confusion of lumber, as ﬂames on the hillside crackle.
Not even the last remaining shrubs are safeguarded from destruction;
Where once the mountain torrents leapt — nothing but rutted gullies.
Timbers, not yet seasoned or used, left immature to rot;
Proud summits and deep-sunk gorges now — brief hummocks of naked rock.
The destruction of the old-growth forests that once covered the greater part of
China.
Some comment is necessary. The poem is a political one. The felling of the
trees alludes to the destruction of men of talent at Court. The ecological reality
was familiar enough, however, for the image to carry a powerful symbolic
impact. ‘Ofﬁcial guardians’ is a title that had in archaic times referred to those
whose task it was to protect natural resources, including animals. Now, more
than a thousand years later it had been transformed, by a twist of bureaucratic
spin-doctoring, into meaning almost the opposite: ofﬁcials responsible for
providing the Court with timber for its new buildings.

20

Patterns

Another way the story may be encapsulated is by juxtaposing two facts. In
east-central China two thousand years ago, it was still common to cut down a
whole tree to make a single cofﬁn.2 In 1983 the People’s Republic of China
placed a ban on using wood for ﬂoors, staircases, electricity poles, mine-props,
railroad ties, bridges, and—vain hope?—cofﬁns.3 China’s reserves of wood per
person today, at approximately ten cubic meters for each inhabitant, are only
about one-eighth of the world average.4 The roots of this disaster go back to
antiquity.
The causes of deforestation, and the stripping of other original vegetation
cover, were threefold. The most common was clearance for farming and settlement, including safety from wild animals and ﬁre. The second most common
was probably the provision of fuel for heating, cooking, and industrial
processes, like the ﬁring of kilns and smelters. The third was the supply of
timbers for building: for houses, boats, ships, and bridges, as well as for other
forms of construction such as the pine pilings that were rammed into the
coastal mud ﬂats as the foundation for stone seawalls.
There was already a shortage of wood for fuel in the central eastern area by
the eleventh century. In 1087, the poet Su Dongpo wrote of the elation caused
by the discovery of coal in what is today the northern part of the province of
Jiangsu.5 The mineralogy in the fourth couplet is interpretative, by the way, not
scientiﬁcally based:
When, the year before last, rainstorms and snowfalls had blocked off
land-based travel,
The people of Peng were afﬂicted — by their shinbones splitting and
cracking.
For half a bundle of sodden ﬁrewood they picked up their quilts in their
arms
And hammered on doors from dawn till dusk, but nobody wanted to
barter.
That a rich inheritance lay in their hills was something they did not know:
Lovely black rock in abundance, ten thousands of cartloads of coal.
No one had noticed the spatters of tar, nor the bitumen, where it oozed
leaking,
While, puff after puff, the strong-smelling vapors — drifted off on their
own with the breezes.
Once the leads to the seam were unearthed, it was found to be huge and
unlimited.

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

21

People danced in throngs in their jubilation. Large numbers went off to
visit it. . . .
In the southern hills, rest, and return to life, await the forests of chestnuts,
Yet iron, stubborn ore from the hills to the north, will be no trouble to
smelt.
Already an awareness of the dangers of deforestation. And concern for the fuel
supplies of premodern industry.
The Chinese also grew trees and bamboos for use, sale, or amenity,6 but this
never compensated for the losses. Regrowth of course occurred in some places
and at some times, after ﬁre and ax had had their way. At the local level it is
over-simple to think solely in terms of unilinear removal.7
As a counterbalancing image to that of destruction we can call to mind the
groves of cultivated bamboo in the Boai region, which is near the western edge
of the Northeast.8 Here irrigation turned part of a barren land into a miniature paradise. According to a late-Ming description:9
In the eighty-three cantons of Henei county,10 the region of the districts of
Wanbei and Lixia has channels for water alongside the cultivated land. The
richness of the fruit trees and the bamboo gardens here is manifest, but they
represent a mere tenth of the area. The remainder . . . are empty wastes as
far as the eye can see. A hundred mou of their gravels, saline soils, and
barren lands, with their countless mountain boulders, are not worth one
mou elsewhere.
The mou was at this time just under seven per cent of a hectare.11
Boai drew its supplies from two rivers. It is not clear when the system was
started, but renovations had to be undertaken in the eighth century ce and
again in the sixteenth, to remove the silt blocking the channels. The network was
thus slightly unstable hydrologically. It could also be disrupted by warfare, as
during the ﬁghting between the Jürchen and the Mongols in the twelfth century,
and by overexploitation, as when too many bamboos were cut down by
ofﬁcials early in the Mongol dynasty. Irrigation—that is, human intervention—
was necessary because of intermittent drought, which made the bamboos ﬂower
and then die. Damage was also done to the groves during the drought of 1690,
when the Manchu government diverted water from the two rivers to help the
transportation of tax-grain by making it easier to ﬂoat the boats.
When all was going well, the place was celebrated for its beauty around the
seasons, and for the ‘freshness and seclusion’ provided by the bamboo gardens
among which the inhabitants built their houses. A late-seventeenth-century
poet wrote of the speckled bamboos said by legend to have been stained by the

22

Patterns

tears of the two wives of an ancient sage–emperor when they lamented his
passing:12
By multiple branching, the sweet-tasting waters ﬂow down through as
many hamlets,
In numberless acres of high-yielding ﬁelds, ﬁne edible sprouts are swelling.
They cultivate, too, the speckled bamboos, till, mature, they’re as stout as
beams,
And, everywhere swaying like dangling splint screens, show the remnants
of widows’ tears.
Clearly, by no means all development was environmentally damaging. But
good or bad, it needed continual maintenance.
Why then do forests matter? One reason is that they reduce the erosion by
which wind and water remove topsoil.13 Vivid descriptions from the lateimperial period reveal the damage done by their destruction when population
pressure drove migrants to clear the uplands for short-term planting with
crops like maize and sweet potatoes. Mei Boyan, who lived from 1786 to 1856,
wrote a classical account of how this was done by wandering groups of squatters called ‘shed people’ who farmed in the hills south of the Yangzi.14 Parallels
can be found in many other areas, and it epitomizes one aspect of the lateimperial environmental crisis.
When the late Dong Wenke was governor of Anhui province [in the East] he
wrote a memorial . . . on the opening up of the mountains by the shed
people. The thrust of his argument was that all those who had attacked the
shed people were so steeped in geomantic theories15 that they had let the
riches in several hundred mou or so of mountains run to waste . . . just in
order to safeguard land harboring a single cofﬁn.16
The shed people were, on the contrary, capable of confronting difﬁculties
and being content with insipid food in the high mountains and places that
but rarely saw traces of human beings. They knew how to open up and sow
dry-ﬁeld cereals in such a way as to supplement rice and sorghum, and the
land gave forth all its beneﬁts to them. It was an appropriate policy to
encourage them, and wrong to put obstacles in their way with prohibitions
that gave rise to quarrels.
When I had read what he had to say, I thought he was right, but when I
went to Xuancheng [in the East], in Anhui, and asked the country people
about it, they all of them said that when the mountains had not been developed the soil had held ﬁrmly in place, and the stones had not budged. The

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

23

covering of plants and trees had been thick and abundant, and after the
rotting leaves had been heaped up for a few years they might reach a depth
of two or three inches. Every day the rain passed from the trees to these
leaves, and from these leaves into the soil and rocks. It passed through the
cracks in the rocks, and drop by drop turned into springs. Downstream, the
rivers ﬂowed slowly. What was more, the water came down without
bringing the soil along with it. When the rivers ﬂowed slowly, the low-lying
ﬁelds received their water without suffering from disaster. Furthermore,
even after half a month without rain, the ﬁelds lying high up still obtained
an inﬂux of water.
These days, people have used their axes to deforest the mountains. They have
employed hoes and plows to destroy the coherence of the soils. Even before
a shower of rain has come to an end, the sands and gravels will be coming
down in its wake. The swift currents ﬁll up the depressions. The narrow
gorges are full to the brim, and cannot retain the mud-ﬁlled water, which
does not stop until it reaches the lowest-lying ﬁelds, where it is then stagnant. These low-lying ﬁelds become completely ﬁlled, but the water does
not continue to ﬂow in the ﬁelds up in the mountains. This is opening
sterile soils for farming, damaging the other ﬁelds where the cereals do
grow, and proﬁting squatters who do not pay taxes, besides impoverishing
registered households who do pay them.
I also listened to what they had to say, and found it to be correct. It has—
alas!—always been impossible for beneﬁt or harm, either one of them, to be
unmixed.
Thus the litter created and held below the trees created a sort of ﬁlter for the
rainwater.17 This ﬁlter also prevented the soil being washed down into the irrigation systems below, and clogging them. Since the soils below the surface
layer were largely sterile, which is why hill-farmers had to move on every three
years or so, the washdown once the trees had gone could make further
difﬁculties for the settled agriculturalists downstream.
In the end a proportion of eroded soil became sediment deposited either on
the bed of a river, its ﬂood plains, or its delta. Thus upstream deforestation
almost certainly lay behind the rapid ﬁlling of the Canton Delta in late-imperial
times.18 The growth of the deltas of the Yellow River, on its various north and
south courses, and of the Yangzi, must both have depended to some degree on
the same effect, mostly at earlier periods. The action of waves and tides then
removed, reworked, and redeposited these sediments, especially once a river
mouth had ceased to be active. This was what happened with the old southcourse mouths of the Yellow River, on the boundary between the East and the

24

Patterns

Northeast, after 1855. The total vertical accretion at the mouth of the south
course between 1194 and 1855 has been estimated at almost ten meters. The horizontal extension seaward in this period was about ninety kilometers.19 In the
extraordinary thirteen years from 1579 to 1591 during which the hydraulic engineer Pan Jixun’s system of scouring silt out of a single consolidated channel was
in full operation, the delta grew seaward at the rate of 1.54 kilometers a year.20
One way or the other, deforestation also created potentially cultivable land, and
in doing so inscribed a visible record on the coasts of China.
Delta land could be separated from the sea by seawalls, then washed free of
salt, and made into rice-ﬁelds enclosed within polders. A ‘polder’, technically,
is an area surrounded by defensive dikes, and below the level of the
surrounding water at some time in the year. This reclamation is what created
much of the Jiangnan region, on the south side of the lower course of the
Yangzi. The site of what is now its greatest city, Shanghai, only emerged from
the sea in about the thirteenth century ce.21 Jiangnan is thus, in a sense, a
‘Chinese Netherlands’.
The formation of new coastal farmland was on balance economically
advantageous, even if it tied up other resources for its protection and maintenance. The problem was what happened along the middle and lower courses of
the major rivers, especially the Yellow.
The Yellow River, though, was not called ‘Yellow’ until about two thousand
years ago, but simply ‘The River’. Toward the end of the ﬁrst millennium bce
the History of the Han Dynasty declared that sixty per cent of its water was
mud.22 This was certainly an exaggeration. Today, for example, just offshore
from the mouth, the average solid content ranges from 0.4 to 3.75 kilograms
per cubic meter of water (which weighs a metric tonne).23 The most likely
reason for the change in color was the promotion of farming in the Northwest
by the Qin and Han dynasties. The grasslands that covered much of the land
along the middle reaches were stripped for agriculture; the temperate-zone
forests in the southeast of the Northwest were felled to meet the need for
timber created by the capital cities.24 Erosion, followed by the deposition of
suspended sediment, made the bed of the Yellow River rise above the
surrounding plain, only kept in its place by man-made levees. In the absence
of levees the banks would have overﬂowed from time to time and, as the
overﬂow slowed down and its carrying power fell, have dumped its load on the
ﬂood plain. The result, until in the end the river broke out anyway and picked
itself a new course, was a perpetual hydraulic headache.
The technology required for building these huge embankments, involving
the mobilization of vast amounts of labor, was in part a product of earlier
military practices. During the period of the Warring States that had preceded

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

25

the uniﬁcation of the Early Empire, several of the combatants had built
massive walls along state frontiers and also used them to direct ﬂoodwaters
across the territories of their enemies.25 This theme, namely the push given by
military pressures to economic technology and early economic growth, is one
to which we shall return in the later chapter on short-term advantage.
During the Warring States period levees were set back about ten kilometers
from the river bank, in order to provide space for ﬂood waters. The History of
the Han Dynasty tells us that eventually the sediments within the levees were
“so rich that the common people cultivated them. It would happen that [for a
time] they would suffer no evil consequences, so they would build houses
there, and later these would form villages. When there were large ﬂoods, these
villages would be drowned; but they would again construct new dikes to
defend them.”26
The varying frequency of serious breaks in the levees of the Yellow River
over the next two thousand years provides a proxy index of the intensity of
farming and logging in the Northwest and Northeast. The ﬁgures are approximate, and subject to possible distortions arising from variability in recording.
They most likely also reﬂect to some degree long-term climatic change.
Nonetheless the differences are clear enough to be fairly unambiguous.
During most of the Han, from 186 bce to 153 ce, one disastrous break in the
levees occurred about every sixteen years. The highest concentration was
between 66 bce and 34 ce, when the frequency rose to one every nine years.27
In around 6 bce Jia Yi estimated the cost of annual repairs falling on the ten
commanderies (approximately, prefectures) along the river as “ten thousand
ten thousands” of copper cash, that is hundreds of millions if the ﬁgure is
taken at face value rather than as rhetoric.28
During the next four centuries, the transfer of populations to the Northwest, and agricultural colonization, came to an end. The weather grew colder.
The frontier between farmers and pastoralists moved south. Grass and forests
regrew. The frequency of serious breaks in the levees fell to one in every ﬁfty
years or less.29 Barbarians were good for the environment.
Toward the end of the Northern Wei dynasty, around 500 ce, the conversion
of parts of the middle reaches of the Yellow River to arable began again. An
example is Hetao on the northwest corner of the great bend. The capital at
Chang'an,30 one of the largest cities in the world at this time, and possibly the
largest, also generated a heavy demand for wood and fuel. After the middle of
the eighth century ce the transformation of the Northwest’s grazing lands to
cereal-growing accelerated.31 In 788 ce, the military governor of a circuit on
the southeastern edge of the Far West, in modern Gansu province, restored a
ruined city there:32

26

Patterns

He led his soldiers in person, sharing with them both hard toil and leisure
moments. They felled the forests, mowed the grasses, and cut down the
thickets, waiting until they had dried, then burning them all. Over an area
several tens of square li all was farmland, beautiful to behold. He urged his
soldiers to plant trees and crops; and their yearly harvest of millets and
vegetables came to several hundred thousand hu.33
Here, as so often, the military appear as developers of marginal lands.
In the last hundred and sixty years of the Tang, from 746 to 905 ce, breaches
in the Yellow River levees occurred about once in every ten years. During the
following period of the Five Dynasties, this rose to one in every 3.6 years.34 In
the ﬁrst phase of the medieval economic revolution under the Northern Song,
from 960 to 1126 ce, the frequency was one every 3.3 years.35 This is an underestimate. Only breaches explicitly mentioned have been included but not
severe ﬂoods. The most catastrophic of these dike-breaks occurred in 1117 ce,
when more than a million people are said to have been killed.36 The way this
ﬁgure stands out like a pinnacle among the records of the death toll in much
smaller disasters gives it, curiously, a certain measure of authenticity. Whatever
the discount applicable for exaggeration, it is clear that a mismanaged ecosystem can kill on a colossal scale.
The course of the Yellow River began moving about in the later twelfth
century,37 often taking multiple courses, and comparative statistics are not
meaningful again until after the end of the sixteenth century. The south course
of the Yellow River during most of the Qing period, that is from 1645 to 1855
ce, a time when population pressure meant a renewed effort to open up the
fragile loess38 lands through which the middle course of the river runs, had one
disaster every 1.89 years.39 Abnormality had become the norm.
A second environmental function of forests is safeguarding the regularity and
the quality of the supply of water.40 An unusual example of this is provided by
Suninga’s account,41 written in 1802, of the water supply of Ganzhou, which lies
north of the Babao mountains in the Far West:42
The livelihood of the people of Ganzhou relies entirely on the water from
the Hei River.43 As spring turns to summer, the ﬁrst melting occurs of the
snow piled up in its pine forests, and it ﬂows into ﬁfty-two channels to irrigate the ﬁelds. The second melting of the snow takes place as summer gives
way to fall, and only when it has ﬂowed into the ﬁfty-two channels is their
harvest assured. Without the pine trees in the Babao mountains, when the
end of spring comes, the winter snows would all melt in a single surge, the
Hei River would overﬂow, the ﬁfty-two channels could not contain it, and a

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

27

disastrous ﬂood would break through them. As a result of the feebleness of
the second snowmelt at the transition from summer to the fall, the water in
the Hei River would be in short supply and low, hence unable to make its
way into the channels to irrigate the ﬁelds, which would cause fear that there
would be a severe drought. The livelihood of the inhabitants of Ganzhou
depends wholly on there being numerous pine forests and on the snow that
accumulates among them. Were they to be cut down it would not be
possible for the snow to pile up among them, which would be a great catastrophe for the populace. It goes without saying that they should be
protected in perpetuity.44
By a twist of fortune, this disaster was exactly what happened toward the end
of the century. According to an account of a journey made in 1891:45
When they installed electric telegraph lines, a certain high ofﬁcial was in
charge of the poles, and he despatched soldiers to cut [the pines]. They
caused immense destruction, since without the snow being kept in the
shade it melted immediately there was the slightest warmth, and thus
caused fear of ﬂooding. There was no rain when summer began, which gave
further concern that there would be drought. The sounds of reports of
resentment were heard in all quarters.46
Many travelers’ accounts associate the presence of trees with good-quality
water, though without drawing an explicit connection between the two.
Tulishen, a Manchu diplomat who visited the Tsarist Russian empire and the
Torguts of the lower Volga early in the eighteenth century, quotes the description of his northern homeland given by his associate Gajartu to the ruler of the
Torguts: “The mountains there are lofty and forbidding, the forests and
wetland thickets deep and dense, and the rivers numerous,” adding that “the
water in all the rivers is sweet and ﬁne. Even in the low-lying places where
ﬂood water has accumulated it is also excellent and in no way different.”47
The Helan or ‘Piebald’ Mountains in the northwest of the Northwest, to the
west of the loop of the Yellow River,48 may be a case where the long-term degradation of the once-abundant forest cover was associated with a partial drying-up
of watercourses. Yuanhao, the founder of the Xixia, or Minyak, a non-Chinese
state that ﬂourished from the late tenth to the early thirteenth century, had a
palace here where he could escape from the summer heat. This and the later
building of a city put heavy demands on timber for construction. It was said
that long after the state had perished woodcutters could still “ﬁnd nails a foot
or two in length among the ruined trees.” Some time before the beginning of
the seventeenth century, the lesser peaks had been “destroyed up hill and down

28

Patterns

dale by logging; woodcutters and hunters had trampled about, and gradually
made tracks through them.” In the higher mountains, though, there were still
“deep woods that gave protection from the sunlight.” The gazetteer for the
prefecture of Ningxia (in the Northwest) reported in 1780 that “there is little
soil in the mountains, but numerous stones. The trees all grow in crevices in
the rocks.” This suggests erosion, though it also seems that there was still
some good cover on the western-facing slopes. Furthermore, the gazetteer
continued:
It is cold in the heights, with snow normally remaining on the peaks until
the ﬁfth or sixth month in high summer. The springs of water are sweet to
the taste and transparent, with a color as white as milk.49 This is so in every
valley with a stream. Lower down, the sands and gravels form a barrier, so
the streams reach the feet of the mountains and there stop. It is not possible
to use them to irrigate places far away.50
Without more evidence it is hard to know whether or not the water supply
had been damaged. One suspects so, but the climate may have become more
arid, or it may have behaved like this even before deforestation. Late-imperial
deforestation is not in doubt, but it is necessary to retain an element of caution
with regard to its effects in particular cases such as this. Future, more detailed,
research may cast doubts on the representative nature over time and space of
individual case-histories like this, or interpret the evidence differently.51
Forests also affect microclimates.52 In temperate zones they usually cool the
temperature, both by evapotranspiration and by providing shadow cover.53
Humidity also increases. Under certain circumstances, they may tend to
increase local rainfall, though the reverse can also occur.54 Some historical
evidence suggests that clearing the woods in tropical and subtropical areas has
in fact reduced rainfall, and that under some circumstances this has even been
helpful to human beings.
An example is the Lianzhou55 area on the south coast near the boundary
between the Far South and the Southwest.56 According to the national gazetteer
for the early nineteenth century,
they cut channels in the sides of the hills and drew in water from springs.
They constructed dikes and built dams to hold the water. Near the rivers they
made square-pallet chain-pumps to drive the water into the irrigation
system. Thus, when the weather turned to drought, they had water to provide
for irrigation. They repaired ditches between the ﬁelds, and cut channels,
so that when there was ﬂooding they could remove it. They separated out

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

29

rice-shoots for transplanting, adding manure and clearing weeds from the
seeds. . . . All the waste land among the forests was fully developed.57
This transformation of the landscape reduced ‘disease due to pestilential
vapors’, which probably refers to one of the forms of malaria.58 Some species of
Anopheles mosquito found in this region, such as A. dirus, do best under heavy
forest cover. The same account continues.
The commandery of Lian used long ago to be described as a place of disease
due to pestilential vapors, on account of its deep valleys and dense woods.
The population was sparse, and the aethers59 of the Bright and Dark Forces60
not healthy. There were in addition the inﬂuences of poisonous snakes,
venomous insects, strange birds, and unusual animals spreading through
the forests and valleys. It was always overcast with rain, and there were
ﬂoods in its streams and torrents. The exhalations off the mountains and
the savage aethers, when added to the foregoing, gave rise to diseases due to
pestilential vapors. . . .
At the present time, the forests are sparse and the torrents widened out. The
light from the sky above shines down; the population is dense, and the
secluded forests every day more opened up. It is a long time now since Lian
and Lingshan [also in the Far South] were afﬂicted by disease due to pestilential vapors. Qinzhou [in the Far South] has in like manner had but little. Only
in Wangguang, Shiwan, and Sidong next to the border with Jiaozhi,61 where the
mountains and streams have not yet been developed, does it still sometimes
exist. Even so, it has not been reported that those who are skilled in looking
after their health and who have traveled there have been smitten by it.
Liu Ts‘ui-jung has found a similar process of change in the microclimate caused
by clearing forests for wet-ﬁeld rice-farming in Taiwan after the later seventeenth century as Han migrants from the mainland settled and transformed the
nonmountainous areas of the island. One mid-nineteenth-century commentator wrote: “When Gemalan was ﬁrst opened up, there were more rainy days
than sunny ones; now, however, cold and warm are both the same as in the interior, and there is no more poisonous ‘miasma’.”62 She also identiﬁes the disease
here described as being caused by pestilential vapors as malaria.
The mechanism by which clearing forests for rice-farming to some extent
controlled malaria must remain a matter for speculation at present. Depending
on the region concerned, one of the several species of the Plasmodium protozoans that cause the disease are carried by a member of one or other of certain
species of Anopheles mosquitoes, whose preferred habitats are not identical.
The mosquito acquires the protozoans as the result of a blood-meal on an

30

Patterns

infected human. It passes them, in its saliva, back into the bloodstream of
another human victim in the same way. The female Anopheles lays her eggs on
the surface of water in the spring, and the full process of development after this
takes about three weeks.63 The theory that the control of water by the ricefarmers, which involves the ﬂooding of ﬁelds prior to transplanting the shoots,
followed by the drainage of the ﬁelds as the harvest ripens, in some way reduces
the opportunities for the successful reproduction of the mosquitoes is questionable, given the range of breeding habits of different species, and the preference of some for moving water.64 The most likely cause of the reduction of
the incidence of malaria seems to be the increased exposure of shade-loving
species of mosquitoes, such as A. dirus mentioned above, to direct sunlight as
the result of clearance.65 Otherwise an increased density of human settlement
would simply have provided more infected humans to pass on the protozoans
to local mosquitoes, and more accessible potential new victims for them to
bite. Some degree of immunity of course may also have been selected for in the
population as the generations passed.66
Dense tree cover thus has disadvantages as well as advantages.
Forests provide habitats for birds and animals and plants.67 Often these are a
source of foods and medicines, as well as other materials. For a farming
community they can serve as a reserve to fall back on if the harvests fail. Their
diminution or loss impairs security through the removal of an environmental
buffer—a theme to which we will often return. The disappearance of forests is
like depriving a population of an environmental insurance policy. They can—
to the contrary—also be a source of danger, both to people and crops. This
dual character creates an ambiguity in their relationship to humankind.
Hunting animals and birds provided part of the diet of ordinary people in
archaic times. The Ordinances for the Months, a work with a degree of scriptural authority, probably compiled in the third quarter of the ﬁrst millennium
bce, has a number of prohibitions that make this clear. For example, in the last
month of spring, “the nets for snaring animals and birds, and those mounted
on long handles for birds, the concealment shelters for those shooting game,
and the toxins used to poison animals should not be taken through the nine
gates of the palaces, cities, suburbs, and barriers outside.”68 In other words,
they were to be kept in storage at this time of year, but could be used later. It
is not clear to what period this text refers, though it was presumably considerably earlier than the date of compilation.
A famous moral tale from the second quarter of the ﬁrst millennium bce
relates how a leading ofﬁcial upbraided the duke of Lu for his “insatiable greed”
in ﬁshing with nets at a time when the young ﬁsh were only just beginning to

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

31

grow up.69 In the golden days of yore, he said, “when birds and beasts were
pregnant with young . . . the ofﬁcial guardian of animals would forbid . . . the
use of nets to catch four-legged beasts or birds.” Likewise, “where deer were
concerned, fawns were to be permitted to grow up.” The use of the beasts was
said to be “both for presentation as sacriﬁces and practical use.”70 It seems likely
that these bans reﬂected a growing awareness of the approaching exhaustion of
many forest resources in northeast and northwest China by this time, and were
an attempt to prevent it.
The great royal hunts of the Shang, which occurred earlier, in the second
millennium bce, were probably not mainly to obtain food, but to secure
sacriﬁcial animals, train troops in the maneuvers used in war, protect crops,
and possibly even engage in sport.71 In the world of the early farmers,
surrounded by forests, deer could be such a threat to growing grain that tigers
were seen as beneﬁcial animals on account of the part they played in keeping
the numbers of deer down.72 The Shang however did not tackle only such
modest game as deer, foxes, wolves, and badgers, but also the aristocrats of the
forests like elephants, tigers, and rhinoceroses. The dynasty maintained a vast
hunting-ground to the west and south of Mount Tai in what is today the
province of Shandong. Such large-scale hunting within China Proper seems
not to have continued under the succeeding Zhou, though the unabashedly
exaggerated Han-dynasty rhapsody on the states of Qi and Chu, Master Emptiness, partially translated in chapter 4 below (pp. 50–1), to some extent hints
otherwise. I suspect that the excesses it describes were felt to be exciting
precisely because they surpassed reality. But, equally, the phenomena depicted
cannot have been entirely unfamiliar if readers were to be gripped, or amused.
Rhinoceroses were almost as widespread as elephants in archaic times and
were regularly hunted by shooting with arrows, or with traps and ﬁres. Their
hides made the standard protective armor for Chinese soldiers for more than
a millennium in archaic times. Their horns were used as drinking cups, or,
later, in powdered form, as an antitoxin.73 The two commonest species in
historical times were the little single-horn and the double-horn. Both are
forest-dwellers, needing access to water for a daily bath to fend off mosquitoes,
and are sensitive to cold. Cold winters killed rhinoceroses in the Tang imperial
menagerie in Chang'an (in the Northwest) in the late eighth century ce. In the
Far South, at about 23° S, in early Song times, they are reported to have kept
themselves warm in the winter months by digging themselves into the ground.
Rhinoceroses had gone from the lower Yangzi valley by the early empire. By
the middle empire they were becoming something of a rarity in the West. The
Tang emperor Xuanzong, who ruled in the middle of the ninth century,
ordered that one found in Quzhou (in the West), after having been brought to

32

Patterns

Court to be looked at, be “returned and set free in the wilds of Quzhou,” as he
“felt anxiety about harming the nature of an animal.” Iron armor had long
replaced hides by this time, and rhinoceroses had changed from being the
source of a military necessity to exotic curiosities. The Tang poet–monk Qiji,
seeing a friend off on a trip to the Far South, romantically envisaged him
Where, among southern-barbarian blooms, lie peacocks hid,
And the rhinoceros rage through stone-strewn wilderness.
All of which is literary imagining regarding a relatively timid and mostly
nocturnal herbivore, and suggests a lack of direct experience of the animal in
the wild.74
Rhinoceroses hung on in the Southwest until the end of the nineteenth
century, but are now extinct in China. Climatic change must have been a factor
in their long and eventually fatal southward retreat, and the desire of the Court
for tribute in the form of horns from particular localities must also have kept
up the pressure for hunting an animal that only reproduces slowly, with a
gestation period of between 400 to 550 days for a single offspring.75 But habitat
destruction was probably, as usual, the crux.
Along the outer northern margins of the historical Chinese world, the
large-scale hunting of animals took another form, spectacular but intermittent compared to that driven by commercial pressures or regular levies by
bureaucrats and the military. In 423, the advisers of the ruler of the nonChinese Northern Wei dynasty, which at that time still ruled mainly over the
largely nomadic Toba people, told him that if he was unable to destroy a small
state as a source of booty with which to sate his followers, “we should engage
in a hunt within a constructed enclosure on the Yin Mountains76 and slaughter
a vast number of birds and animals. Their skins, ﬂesh, tendons, and horns
may be used to meet the needs of the army.”77 A few years later, in 431, “several
tens of thousands of horsemen” from three of the northern tribes under Toba
rule “drove several million deer to this place where the emperor then
proceeded to hold a great hunt, whose spoils he presented to his followers. He
had a stone engraved south of the desert to record his capacity for achievement.” We are not told what sort of landscape these hunts took place in, but
it seems likely that they were at least partly forested, perhaps in a fairly open
fashion.
At the less dramatic everyday level, and across the empire as a whole, supplementary hunting continued over the centuries until, region by region, the
forests had shrunk or vanished to the point where this was often difﬁcult or
even no longer possible. In later chapters on Guizhou (in the Southwest) and
Zunhua (in the Northeast) we shall see how emergency hunting and gathering

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

33

could even so provide an ecological buffer against inadequate harvests for
some people into late-imperial times.
The opening of an international market could be still deadlier than the
megalomania of barbarian monarchs. Liu Ts’ui-jung has described how up to
the start of the seventeenth century the aborigines in Taiwan hunted deer on a
sustainable basis, even with the exportation of some deerskins and dried
venison to Fujian province across the straits. With the coming of the Dutch
East India Company, and an annual export of sometimes over 100,000 skins a
year to Japan, the herds went into decline. Deer were largely extinct in
southern Taiwan by the end of this century, and the reclamation of grasslands
by Chinese farmers in the century that followed came close to making them
extinct in the island as a whole.78
Parrots, who are in the main woodland birds, likewise grew scarcer as the
trees disappeared. They symbolized the ambivalent character of the forests as
reserves of biological resources. The Chinese appreciated parrots. In Qing
times, a poet79 wrote of Lintao in the Northwest:80
Lintao’s beauties come to mind —
The ample light in springtime on
Its peonies open a full foot wide,
Its parrots ﬂying past in throngs.
They were admired for their skill in avoiding nets, their taste for cleanliness,
sometimes (it was said) even pulling out a feather that had been stained with
oil, and for their ability to copy and respond to human speech. But parrots
were a menace. In the Qing dynasty, one observer81 wrote of the region of the
Greater and Lesser Jin rivers in the West:82
Every year, just as the harvest of naked oats is ripening, parrots come ﬂying
in hundreds and thousands, darkening the sky as they descend. Their green
wings are resplendent, their voices a squawking babble. The farmers grasp
hold of staves to defend the crops. Some of them are crafty and lay traps
among the ears. Once the birds have gathered, the mechanism releases
a concealed catch that grabs their feet, so that it is possible to capture
them alive.
The Treatise on the Strange Beasts of the South mentions that there were
numerous parrots in various parts of the Far South, including what is today
the Canton area. If one of the ﬂocks of several hundred birds chanced on fruit
in the mountains that was coming to maturity, the fruit would vanish in an
instant. The so-called ‘stone chestnut’ that grew between rocky crevices in the
mountains in the Far South, and tasted like a walnut, was particularly prized

34

Patterns

by local people because it was so difﬁcult to get a ripe one before the local
parrots did.83 Rearing parrots in captivity was also known to be dangerous.
Folklore had it that if one touched their backs too often one would catch
‘parrot malaria’, presumably some form of psittacosis, and die.84
Nature may be beautiful, at times stunningly beautiful, but beauty is no
guarantee that it is healthy for humankind. Take peacocks. They like sparse
woods and thickets rather than dense forests, and were once common in the
Far South, not just the Southwest which is their refuge today. Humans reduced
their numbers, not only through habitat destruction, but also because they are
tasty to eat, particularly when fried in oil. Their feathers were also in demand
as tribute to the imperial court. But peacocks poison the environment.
According to one writer85 in Qing times,86
That the water in the rivers in the region of Laibin,87 Nanning, and Xunzhou
[all in the Far South]88 is foul-smelling and turbid is connected with the
excrement of peacocks. The color of the water is sometimes jade-green and
at others a dirty red, and so unpleasant that one cannot go near it. Boats
have to travel for ﬁfty kilometers without coming to a well. This leaves them
no option but to use alum to settle and clear the water, and then add ﬂowers
of sulfur to remove the poison. After this it is ﬁt to drink. Eighty to ninety
per cent of those affected by the poison either have diarrhea or are overcome by depression.
The dense woods of South and Central China also harbored tigers, which
were responsible for the deaths of many travelers and others.89 On occasion this
prompted human counterattacks. One unusual instance, using gunpowder,
was recounted by Shi Dakai in the middle of the nineteenth century. Shi was
one of the leaders of the anti-Manchu Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace. After
falling out with his fellow rebels he took his troops off on a long march into
western China which lasted from 1857 to 1863 and ended in his destruction by
the Manchu government. At a town near Nanshi,90 where his scouts were
mauled by tigers, Shi found that the inhabitants often kept the south gate of
their town closed in the summer for fear of these animals which lived in the
dense forests on a hill just outside. He therefore had one of his explosives
experts, a certain Wang, blow up a section experimentally:91
I climbed up onto a stele to watch from a distance, and personally saw thick
smoke covering everything. This was followed by a clap of thunder and ‘the
heavens fell in and the earth split open’. A small section of the mountain had
been pulverized and had collapsed. The roots of the trees had been torn out
and were ﬂying and dancing about. The wild animals were dashing away in
frenzied disorder. I could not make out which were tigers, leopards, jackals,

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

35

or wolves. Wang observed that for this he had only made use of a little
explosive force. If substantial explosive force were used for half a month the
entire sector could be made into a level road running through to the other
side of the mountain. The dens of the savage beasts and venomous snakes
could be eliminated overnight.
Once again we are forced to confront the ambiguity of forests.
With the passing of the centuries, the environmental buffer provided by trees
became more and more degraded. Here, from the later seventeenth century,
are the opening lines of “The Song of the Elms” about famine in Jurong, which
was in Jiangsu province, southeast of Nanjing:92
Beside the walls of Jurong city, along the verges of ancient roads,
Rise a thousand — ten thousand — stumps of elms, but all of them are
colorless.
Nothing but withered trunks are left, their bark-cover stripped off totally,
As the famished inhabitants, loathing it, pestled the chunks into crumbs.
The last remnants of a life-support system.
Across the economy of the late empire the scarcity of wood for fuel and
construction was the daily price paid for more than two thousand years of
deforestation. For many people in many areas life had become a constant
struggle as a result. Typical are some lines written in the Qing dynasty on
Shizhou in Shanxi province (in the Northwest):93
Limping through fearsome deﬁles, the old men return
With bundles on their shoulders of the wood they need for burning.
To draw their water the young married women must travel a long way off
And far down dip their earthenware crocks into the deep-sunk torrents.
It was the same story in the lower Yangzi region. Jiang Tingyi wrote six poems
on various kinds of shortages here, among them the following on fuel for
cooking:94
Our family’s courtyard’s ﬁlled with grass and weeds.
Below the steps grow pines, and innumerable bamboos.
From here, at dawn, we take the fuel to cook our morning meal,
And, as dusk falls, we gather more to steam our evening gruel.
It’s the easiest of matters to exhaust bamboos and pines,
And our grasses, and our weeds, can never grow enough.
So we take a hundred cash in hand when the day is growing light,
And come back, as it’s getting dark, with a market-purchased bundle.

36

Patterns

The damp can make the ﬁrewood too soggy to really burn,
And rice that’s not boiled dry is still not properly cooked.
Emptiness in our stomachs makes us utter plaintive murmurs:
Eight unﬁlled mouths, and eyes — that swell with hopeful looks.
When we trudged along those ridges not so many months ago,
Like clusters of upright arrows stood the trees upon the hills.
All that we can see today, as we pass through the lands below,
Are those same slopes in the distance, but sharp-edged now, and stripped.
The common folk who farm have nothing left for fuel,
And set the wooden axles of their water-pumps ablaze.
They have no prospects after this. Husbandry is useless.
So they smash their shacks and sell the planks inside the city gates.
Probably rhetorical exaggeration, but other references to this sort of desperation can be found.
Environmental plundering was common. Vagrants who moved round in
bands big enough to overawe local people sometimes engaged in this crime:95
They pull rocks from the banks to prop up their stoves
And from the walls they wrest out the bricks.
They scythe brush for fuel, and fell cemetery groves,
Till most pines and cypresses lie about — killed.
At the other end of the social scale, the difﬁculty in ﬁnding timbers large
enough to build ships led the Qing government to commandeer trees from
gardens and even grave sites. According to a poet writing near the end of the
seventeenth century:96
To build ships in Jiangnan demands they cut huge trees.
So strict warrants go to Zhejiang, and to Hedong and Hexi:97
‘Fell elms and willows in garden groves that are ten spans around,
And the hundred-foot-tall conifers that stand by burial mounds!’
Whatever great families, and titled clans, have available they begrudge,
Yet how can the quotas be obtained from yokels of little substance?
The county ofﬁcials mark off trunks, their tallies held in their hands,
Their commands to the Yangzi villages throwing humble folk into panic.
The remotest mountains and boundless marshes are already scattered
wreckage,
In vain, amid the winding lanes, people cherish their scattered hedges.

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

37

And so he goes on, shocked that graveyards, previously spared by imperial
decree, are no longer exempt.
Industry was similarly affected. In a poem on the ofﬁcial Yunnan copper
mines, probably composed in the middle or later eighteenth century, Wang
Dayue expressed a sobering vision of the coming exhaustion of reserves of
wood:98
Rarer, too, their timber grew, and rarer still and rarer,
As the hills resembled heads now shaven clean of hair.
For the ﬁrst time, too, moreover, they felt an anxious mood
That all their daily logging might not furnish them with fuel.
Cutting wood for the market became big business. But as some problems were
solved, others intensiﬁed. Large-scale operations provided valuable materials,
but also caused environmental damage. Lumbering offered much-needed
employment, and violent social disruption threatened if it closed down. This
could happen if the price of grain rose to the point where it did not pay an
employer to hire labor, since supplying workers either with food, or with
adequate wages to buy it, was crucial to the system. Or the economically accessible supply of suitable trees in a particular place could run out.
The following prosaic verses from Yan Ruyi’s “Song of the Timber Yards” on
commercial logging in the Northwest, probably early in the nineteenth century,
reﬂects these anxieties.99 Several points need a word of explanation. The
Zhongnan in the ﬁrst line are a range of mountains just south of the Wei River,
and crowned by Mount Taibai which rises to over three thousand meters.100
The reference to two capital cities at the end of the second stanza is a literary
turn of phrase that comes from earlier dynasties, such as the Han and Tang,
when there were in fact two capitals. This was not the case under the Qing. The
‘sky-trucks’ and ‘sky-bridges’ are said in an author’s note to have been made
from wooden frameworks; the ﬁrst may have been an early form of cable
skidder.101 The invented terms ‘water-jacks’ and ‘timber-monkeys’ are my
guesses for otherwise untranslatable words that seem respectively to refer to
men who took care of the logs ﬂoating down the rivers, and those who pulled
them out at the end of their journey. Ox Mountain was a famous deforested
hill referred to by the philosopher Mencius in the fourth century bce. He
argued that its treeless state was no more natural than the state of the men was
in his degenerate times.
Extending West, the Zhongnan twist and wind
Until they crosswise meet with Mount Taibai,
A bluish darkened green, more than three hundred miles
Of intertwining shrubs against the sky.

38

Patterns

Famed as materials, straight ﬁrs, Castanea trees,102
And pines and cypresses, verdant throughout the winter,
Are, when collected, useful — to meet the people’s needs,
And shipped and traded in both capital cities.
To serve as beams or rafters is only for logs that are massive,
The destiny of slender lengths is to end in cookhouse ﬂames.
Merchants, since well endowed, can provide investment capital;
And make plans calmly for returns beyond all expectations.
Supervision of the accounts is under the head clerks’ direction,
While engineers survey and gauge for the operations in hand,
Bookkeepers enter the records — of payments — into their ledgers,
And labor-contractors organize sworn brethren into gangs.
Several fathoms in girth around are the multitudinous trunks.
And once the axes are laid aside, cables are used to haul them,
Dragged up and down by ‘sky-trucks’ over the slopes and summits,
And ferried, along ‘sky-bridges’, across ravines and gorges.
The boards, on the porters’ backs, tax their strength with their heavy weight,
Men who are nicknamed ‘mules’ because of their sturdy endurance.
The accumulated logs will wait, till the river’s again in spate,
And ‘water-jacks’ send them on their way — down the ebullient currents.
‘Timber-monkeys’ pile up the logs where the river valleys open,
Stacking them up to towering heights like wooden city walls.
A single yard has a numerous force of workers at its disposal:
The largest can bring together a thousand of them, or more.
Opening the forest little by little is how they make their way forward,
Under such disciplined control they seem to be a battalion. . . .
Half of these gangs of workers are wandering, homeless, men.
Great numbers depend upon these jobs to provide them with a life.
Some years ago, when there arose the stirrings of rebellion,
No hesitation held them back from joining in the ﬁghting.
By relying on tough commanders, the insurgency was throttled.
Those who’d originated revolt were all of them put to death.
But how can we impose a ban on what brings people proﬁt?
Compassion is also needed when livelihoods are threatened.
Opening forests and gathering timber depend on the merchants’ funds,
And also rely on the weather being, time and again, propitious.

The Great Deforestation: An Overview

39

When foodgrain’s cheap and their workers ﬁnd — the cost of living no
trouble,
They sit at their ease and lick their lips at the thought of the year’s-end
proﬁts.
Returns accrue to the businessmen that are bigger than their investment,
And mobs of workers congregate like the swarms of summer’s insects.
But it’s not so easy to forecast when ﬂood or drought will occur.
Sudden the alternation between bumper harvest and dearth.
If, for a single year, the cost of food has gone up,
Then, in the year that follows, to continue production is tough.
When eleven liters of millet fetch a price of a thousand coppers,
The merchants’ reserves are inadequate. And jobs come to a stop.
Lumberjacks who lived by their muscles will scatter and disperse.
How can they supply themselves? Or themselves direct the work?
Could Ox Mountain again be beautiful, clear-felled so long ago,
When arid, bare, reﬂection is now the state of its slopes?
True, it is sometimes said, when an old-growth forest’s downed,
That one can cultivate the soil by putting it under the plow.
But do those who say this realize, when lumber’s taken out,
That for every trunk that’s cut, hundreds of men milled about,
And the twisting roots plunge down, ten feet or more in depth?
If you sow grain in such a place, how many stalks will you get?
Still, in that stony tilth, there lingers the chill of the heights.
The usual cereals we eat need other land and dikes.
Late-imperial Chinese premodern economic growth, as we shall see repeatedly
in later chapters, was already close in many respects to its Western counterparts on the eve of the industrial revolution. The market dominated production, including the hiring and ﬁring of a workforce that had no security. There
was a complex, literate and numerate, internally specialized, managerial staff.
The technology used was self-consciously advanced for its time. The state
picked up the tab for the social dislocation caused by business activities. Useful
economic needs were being serviced, but the environment was being mauled
and exploited in an unsustainable way. And with a proﬁt-motivated stamina
that made the ‘ofﬁcial guardians’ mentioned at the opening of the chapter
appear intermittent and inefﬁcient despoilers in comparison.

4
The Great Deforestation:
Regions and Species
Let us be more systematic. At the coarsest focus, there would currently be three
main zones of vegetation cover in China if there had been no human interference. The ﬁrst is that where there is little or no cover, mostly various kinds of
deserts in the Far West. The second is the world of grasses, meadows at the
higher altitudes and steppes lower down. This covers western Manchuria,
inner Mongolia, the western edges of the Northwest, and most of Tibet. The
third is what would be mostly a domain of trees and substantial shrubs, had
agriculture not become widespread.
Turning up the focus on this last, it is clear that the major divide within the
actually or potentially forested region is between a temperate and warmtemperate region to the north characterized by deciduous broadleaf trees, and
a subtropical region to the south characterized by evergreen broadleafs. As
would be expected, there is a wide zone of transition, which lies mostly
between the Huai River and the middle and lower Yangzi, though forests of a
mixed type extend well to the south of the Yangzi. Nor is the contrast between
the domains dominated by ‘deciduous’ and ‘evergreen’ broadleaf trees as sharp
as has just been suggested. There are important deciduous broadleafs in the
subtropical zone. Natural bamboo forests are also an important marker of the
southern zone, though the pattern has been blurred by human plantings. Each
zone also has its own distinctive conifers. In the Far South, there is another
world again: the trees become a mix of subtropical and tropical species.
Hainan Island even has coconut palms.
This pattern has been derived by a selective amalgamation of the information
in the detailed map of China’s vegetation cover published by Hou Xueyu in 1988.
It would be possible to interpret his data in a somewhat different way, putting

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

41

more stress on east–west differences, or creating more ﬁnely graded north-tosouth subdivisions in the two main forest zones. Schemes of subdivision along
the general lines used here have however been formulated by Wang Chi-wu in
1961, Hou himself in 1988, Menzies in 1996, and Ueda Makoto in 1999, though
there are differences in their sense of what is critical.1 I have opted for the
simplest possible system, using the seasonal loss or retention of the foliage as the
major marker so far as possible. Strictly, this requires a separate zone in the far
north of Manchuria to provide for the deciduous larches, notably Larix gmelinii,
whose Chinese name means ‘the pine that drops its leaves’.2
The Western reader will already be familiar with many of the common genera
of Chinese trees: oak (Quercus), pine (Pinus), elm (Ulmus), ash (Fraxinus), and
other old friends.3 A good number of trees that are East Asian in origin have also
been introduced into parks and gardens in the West, and can often be found
described with illustrations in handbooks such as The Reader’s Digest Encyclopaedia of Garden Plants and Flowers. Examples are the Pagoda Tree (Sophora
japonica) and the Maidenhair Tree (Gingko biloba) with its distinctive partly
divided leaves. Others can be found in illustrated guides like Roger Phillips’s
Trees in Britain, Europe and North America. Instances are the Japanese Cedar
(Cryptomeria japonica) and the (conventionally misnamed) ‘Chinese Fir’
(Cunninghamia lanceolata). This last is a quick-growing evergreen conifer that
is resistant to decay, and was used in past times for cofﬁns, boats, and pilings.
Understandably, it has long been a favorite for commercial exploitation.
Even if books such as these do not contain the exact Chinese species that
one wants, they sometimes describe a close relative. An example from the
Phillips is the maple-like Oriental Sweet Gum (Liquidambar orientalis) which
is not too different from the Chinese L. formosana that a millennium-and-ahalf ago lined the banks of the lower Yangzi.
But identifying many individual species does cause difﬁculties. It does not
help that the constant revision of botanical names means that older works of
reference are frequently incorrect. Take the wutong. Myth had it that this was
the only tree on which a phoenix would alight, but it can nonetheless sometimes be found today lining streets in cities south of the Yangzi. Herbert
Giles’s Dictionary, now more than a century old, gives it as Sterculia platanifolia, which hints at the plane-tree-like leaves. The 1947 edition of the widely
used Chinese encyclopedia Cihai [Sea of Phrases] identiﬁes it as Firmiana
platanifolia.4 Today it is Firmiana simplex. In the sketches of the individual
zones that follow I shall keep unfamiliar botanical names to a minimum.
Let us then take an armchair historical journey around the main regions of
China as characterized by their trees. Besides providing an overview of what
were very different patterns of deforestation, this tour will also serve as an

42

Patterns

introduction to the regional geography. The one major omission is the Yangzi
delta, which is covered in detail in the later chapter on the prefecture of
Jiaxing.

The heartland
The southern part of the temperate and warm-temperate zone of deciduous
broadleaved trees was the heartland of archaic China. The mean annual
temperature here varies greatly with latitude, and has also varied over time. It
is currently around 14.5° Celsius in places like Kaifeng in He'nan and Ji'nan in
Shandong. The weather regularly drops below freezing in the winter, yet averages between 26° to 28° in these areas at the height of the summer. Yearly rainfall can reach 1,000 mm on the coast, but sinks below 600 mm as one moves
west. Two-thirds or more of this precipitation occurs during the summer, and
the amount varies sharply from one year to the next. Dry-land farming here
has long been a risky undertaking.
When we turn now to the pattern through time, it is not possible to begin
at the beginning, which is inaccessible to historian’s history—that is history
based on documents that give some direct insight into the human mind. We
have to start some way into the story, when windows of evidence have opened
through which we can get glimpses of the causes behind human interaction
with nature.
The Zhou dynasty that wrested mastery of the Chinese world from the
Shang, or Yin, toward the end of the second millennium bce was a civilization
based on deforestation. Self-consciously, passionately, so. The opening lines of
an anthem in the Scripture of Songs, which claims the divine right of the Zhou
house to rule, are unambiguous in their enthusiasm for destruction. It is the
basis for development:5
Majestic indeed was our Lord God Above
As He gazed down in splendor upon this, our world.
The four quarters lay under His rule, and His judgment,
That the people below should live undisturbed.
But neither Xia’s state, nor successor Shang dynasty,
Had proved able to govern the empire correctly.
So He scrutinized deeply, appraised, and considered
All the other realms spreading north, east, south, and west.
This done, His verdict came into effect:
Detesting Shang’s style so befouled by excesses,

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

43

He shifted to us, in the west, His affection,
And bestowed on our Zhou — a place we could settle.
We uprooted the trees then! Lugged trunks aside
— Those that, dead, still stood upright, and those that had toppled.
We pruned back the branches, or ﬂattened entirely
The stands in long lines and the thick-tangled coppices.
We cut clearings among them. We widened the openings
Through tamarisk forests and knob-jointed cane-trees.
We tore from the soil, or else lopped back, groves
Of wild mulberry bushes and spiny Cudranias. . . .
When our Lord God Above had examined these hillsides,
We ripped out oaks whose leaves fall, and those green the year round,
Clearing spacious expanses amid pine and cypress.
Here God made our state, and our sovereign, His counterpart.
The tale of ‘Prince Millet’, quasi-mythical founder of the Zhou line, and
symbol of farming culture, as recounted in the Songs, mentions how as a baby
he survived various hardships thanks to the help of animals and birds. And
also, more enigmatically:6
When he was abandoned — in some woods where land was level,
Chance so had it that these ﬂat-land woods were felled.
Farming meant the removal of the forest. Another of the Zhou anthems
begins7
After cutting down trees, and scything the grasses,
Their plowing has scattered the soil into fragments.
Another again mentions how Danfu, the historical ancestor of the Zhou state,
cleared the Plain of Zhou:8
Widespread his hatred — unfailing!
So, too, his renown — never fading!
He tore out both shedding and evergreen oaks
So that the highways for travel lay open.
Headlong the Gunyi barbarians ﬂed.
Then indeed were they breathless!
The conqueror’s ecstasy of dispossession and development. The non-Chinese,
who lived among the trees, almost deﬁned as non-Chinese by doing so, were
sent packing by the destruction of their habitat.

44

Patterns

It is not surprising that, somewhat later, when ‘barbarians’ wished to stress
how ‘Chinese’ they had become, they would point to their having cleared the
land for farming. In 557 bce a prince of the Rong barbarians was being mocked
as the descendant of a grandfather who had been driven from his lands wearing
a cloak made of reeds and covered with brambles—contemptible garb—and
told he was not ﬁt to take part in a meeting of rulers. The prince gave a digniﬁed
answer, part of which ran as follows:9
Duke Hui . . . bestowed on us ﬁelds on his southern frontier. It was a place
inhabited by foxes and where wolves howled. We Rong cut and cleared the
thorny bushes. We drove away the foxes and wolves. We became subjects of
those former rulers, and never invaded them and never rose against them in
revolt.
He was accepted.
There is not yet enough evidence even to guess as to whether or not the
Zhou attitude to forests differed markedly from that of their predecessors. Was
it to some degree more aggressive? Clues are frail and fugitive. Perhaps the
most tantalizing is that the Shang-dynasty oracle-bone graph for ‘farming’
appears to show an activity being carried on in the midst of trees.10 The
account later given by Mencius of the origins of Chinese civilization close to
two thousand years after the event probably only reﬂects the more-than-likely
different attitudes of the late archaic or early classical period:11 “The
sage–emperor Shun commissioned the forestry ofﬁcial Bo Yi to manage the
ﬁres. Bo Yi set ﬁres in the mountains and marshes, and burnt them clear. The
birds and beasts ﬂed away to hide themselves.” This is another statement of the
policy of environmental clearances attributed by Mencius to the Duke of
Zhou, and quoted in the previous chapter.
By the early ﬁrst millennium bce, if not considerably earlier, the focus of state
economic concern was on farming. The Commentary of Zuo, which covers
events from early in the eighth century bce till early in the ﬁfth, has frequent
accounts of the organized military theft of the grain reserves of other states
and the pillaging of harvests. The disasters normally thought to be worth
recording were those that affected an agricultural economy: droughts, ﬂoods,
granary ﬁres, and plagues of cereal-devouring insects.12 By the Warring States
period, however, it was not uncommon for a besieging army to cut down the
trees in the territory of the state it was attacking—seemingly as valuable
plunder.13
Overall, we can conclude that there was once considerable forest cover in
the heartland of late-archaic China. Otherwise we would not have records,

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

45

such as those cited above, of the efforts spent in removing it. Nevertheless, it is
wise to be cautious and not to assume that it was originally widespread everywhere. There are extensive accounts of hunting by rulers and the aristocracy in
two-wheeled chariots pulled by four horses. It seems unlikely that, in the
absence of some sort of a trackway, it would have been easy to drive such a
vehicle through country much more densely wooded than an open savanna.
So much at least is suggested by the handful of anecdotes that have survived.
In 596 bce, when Zhao Zhen was being pursued, “he abandoned his chariot
and ﬂed into a wood.”14 In 588, when the ruler of the state of Qi was at war with
an allied army from a number of other states, “the two outer horses of his foursome became ensnared by a tree, and stopped.”15 Finally, during a skirmish in
549, a certain Luan Le was about to loose off a second arrow against an opponent whom he had missed with his ﬁrst shot, when “his chariot drove into the
trunk of an acacia tree and overturned.” This cost him his life.16 Chariots and
heavy woodland don’t mix.
Large-scale hunting tended to be done in the ‘plain’, grassland typically
covered with ﬂowers and plants such as thistles, rather than with closely set
trees, and inhabited by deer, wild pig, and rhinoceroses.17 That hunting such
animals was regularly done in chariots is at least suggested by a story told of
the ruler of Qi when he was hunting in 685 bce. He saw a large boar, which his
attendants said was the incarnation of the murderer of the ruler of the state of
Lu. Enraged, the ruler of Qi loosed off an arrow at this ‘man–pig’, but it only
stood up and howled at him. Panicked, the prince “fell over in his chariot and
injured his foot.” Not long afterwards he was the object of an unsuccessful
attempt at assassination.18
There are close to no accounts of forests affecting warfare, though sometimes a wood would give its name to a military rendezvous. One of the rare
exceptions to this absence relates to events in 518 bce. After some of the armed
forces of the small state of Zhu, located in the south of what is today the
province of Shandong, had fortiﬁed a stronghold, they found themselves
obliged to return home past the hostile city of Wucheng, which belonged to
the state of Lu:19
The people of Wucheng blocked them off to the front. To what was to be the
Zhu rear they cut trees, but not to the extent that they fell over. Once the
army of Zhu had passed this point, they pushed them so they toppled down.
They then made the Zhu army their prisoners.
By the sixth century bce wood had already become a scarce commodity in
the region along the northeastern sea coast. In 538, the statesman Yanzi
commended the fair dealing of the Chen clan of the state of Qi, observing that

46

Patterns

“when the trees from their hills go to market, they charge no more for them
than they do back in the hills.”20 Somewhat later, in 522, he criticized the
selﬁshness of the ruler of the same state, implying that this might have
prompted the spirits to make him ill in consequence:21 “The trees of the mountain forests are watched over by the ofﬁcials called henglu.” There was already
the beginning of a shortage of natural resources, and the state was extracting
proﬁt from it.
The core culture of classical China, located in the central part of the Yellow
River valley, the southern part of the deciduous broadleaf zone, thus had no
attachment to forests, no commitment to preserve them except—in rather later
times—as reserves of useful timber,22 and certainly no reverence for them. There
were regular sacriﬁces to mountains and rivers, and a sense of the numinous
magic in these natural phenomena. There was a belief that deities presided over
the winds and the rains. The scriptural Monthly Ordinances does forbid the
sacriﬁce of female animals to “mountains, forests, rivers, and marshes,”23 which
indicates at least a minimum of forest worship or propitiation, but, so far as I
know, there were no distinctive gods or goddesses of the forest in this most
ancient of the areas that we recognize as ‘Chinese’. In the Rituals of Zhou, which
is at least partly and probably largely an idealization from early-imperial times,
it must be noted that the Guardian of the Mountain Forests24 is described as
being in charge of “sacriﬁcial offerings to [the spirit[s] of] the mountain forests.”
This involved cleaning the ritual site, which probably had an altar and some
image or representation of the spirit(s), and keeping passers-by away from it. We
are not told any more.25 The chapter on religion in Song Zhenhao’s History of
Social Life under the Xia and Shang Dynasties identiﬁes numerous rituals of preZhou times dedicated to natural phenomena, but nothing to forests.26 A millennium later, in 540 bce, Zichan, the celebrated prime minister of the state of
Zheng, is likewise said to have observed:27
When we are afﬂicted with ﬂoods, or droughts, or epidemic disease, we
sacriﬁce to the gods of the mountains and the rivers to remove them. When
we meet with snow or frost or winds and rains that are out of season, we
offer sacriﬁces to the gods of the sun and moon and stars and planets to
remove them.
But not forests. Forests seem to have been primarily the lairs of demons. In 605
bce a certain Wangsun Mang spoke as follows of the nine bronze caldrons
reputed to have been cast in an age long gone by the sage–emperor Yu the Great:28
He had the caldrons cast to bear the representations of the various beings.
All of them were to be found there. This was how he caused the people to
know how to recognize the evil tricks played by supernatural forces. So it

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

47

was that when the people went out into the rivers and wetlands, or the
mountains and forests, they did not meet with any misadventure. None of
the demons of the hills or rivers was able to attack them.
The more positive supernatural side possessed by the mountains and rivers
seems to have been, with the most minor exceptions, absent from the world of
forests.
A forest is a world, a physical and spiritual habitat, whether one loves it or
shuns it. A tree is a resource. The Zhou Chinese certainly valued trees that had
an economic use, whether for fruit and nuts, for construction timber and
ﬁrewood, or for feeding silkworms. In 711 bce, in the course of settling an
argument about precedence, the point that it was the host who determined the
ranking of his guests was clinched by the remark “The Zhou have a saying:
‘When there are trees upon a hill, it is the carpenter who gauges what they are
useful for.’”29 One of the anthems of the state of Lu records the logging of the
mountains of what is today Shandong province to build the New Temple:30
From Mount Culai they brought the pines,
From Mount Xinfu the trunks of cypress,
Cut them according to the measure,
In fathoms and feet marked widths and lengths.
Massively thick the raftered pine,
The chamber imposingly immense.
There are also many references to chopping down trees for fuel in the Songs.
Most of them are probably literary devices to score a point by analogy or implication. They should therefore not be taken as necessarily reﬂecting common
practices—at times maybe even the opposite, in the search for increased rhetorical impact—but their frequency conﬁrms the impression that trees were often
seen as not much more than ﬁrewood waiting to be burnt. For example,31
How densely clustered the oak-tree thickets!
Fuel for the sacriﬁcial rituals!
In later times, at least, these lines were used to refer to the abundance of political talent surrounding the ruler. Or again, consider this part of a rebuke to a
faithless lover:32
Getting my ﬁrewood by cutting that mulberry —
As it burns in the portable stove, I warm up.
This may—perhaps—carry the implication that a mutual affection that could
be ﬂourishing and beautiful is being used up in a way that is self-destructive.

48

Patterns

Conversely, trees with ﬂourishing foliage often serve as a symbol of wellbeing.33 A closely knit family was also likened to the branches and foliage on a
central trunk, each assisting the other.34
As a political, rather than a personal, lament there are lines like35
Take a look at that forest placed in the middle:
Fit only for ﬁrewood, only for kindling.
This is an indirect way of saying that the ministers at court are worthless. What
was probably a protest against the suffering of the innocent is contained in
some other verses:36
Fine plant-cover grows on the mountain’s ﬂanks,
Such as chestnut trees and mume plums.
People, perversely, molest them and damage them,
Yet no one knows what wrong they have done.
Mume plums are the so-called ‘Japanese apricot’ (Prunus mume).
Trees were thus a part of the rich world of rhetoric and allusion in latearchaic and early classical China. But not forests. The two should not be
confused.
Useful trees were planted beside buildings and around homesteads. These
included hazels, catalpas, chestnuts, lacquer, willows, mulberries, and Chinese
dates.37 In 535 bce, when Gongzi Qiji of the southern state of Chu passed
through the state of Zheng he took pains to make sure his followers behaved
themselves:38
He placed prohibitions on the gathering of fodder, putting out animals to
graze, and gathering ﬁrewood: farmers’ ﬁelds were not to be entered, planted
trees were not to be taken for fuel, cultivated plants were not to be gathered,
rooves were not to be pulled off, and nothing was to be seized by force.
In other words the opposite of the actions of the usually ill-behaved military.
Last of all, it should be noted that catalpa trees—probably mainly Catalpa
bungei, which still grows on the foothills round the north China plain—were
often planted beside graves.39
Especially in the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst millennium bce, when it was still possible
to relocate entire cities—because they were small and there was unused land
to move to—the Chinese showed a great sensitivity to the economic, health,
and psychological aspects of their environment, including the availability of
trees. The following is said to have happened in 584 bce in what is today the
southern part of the province of Shanxi:40

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

49

The people of the state of Jin planned to abandon their old capital at Jiang.
The senior ministers declared, however: “We should stay here in the land of
our ancestral clans. . . . The soil is fertile and we are close to a source of salt.
The state proﬁts from so doing, and the ruler is content. This must not be
forfeited.” . . .
The ruler asked Xianzi: “How should we act?”
“It is not appropriate to stay here,” Xianzi replied. “The soil of this land of
our ancestral clans . . . is thin, and its streams are shallow. One can easily
catch diseases, and when this is so the people suffer from anxiety. If they
suffer from anxiety they feel stressed and cornered. Under such conditions
they are afﬂicted by the internal accumulation of ﬂuid and swollen lower
extremities.41
“Xintian is better. The soil is thick, and the streams run deep. If one lives
there one does not become sick. The Fen and Gui rivers carry illnesses away.
People there will also be in a ﬁt state to receive instruction. The beneﬁts will
last for ten generations.
“Now mountains, marshes, forests, and salterns are the treasures of the
state. When the state is afﬂuent, its people grow arrogant and idle. Though
such treasures lie near at hand, the ruling house is impoverished. It cannot
be said to be content.”
The ruler was pleased with this counsel. . . . Jin moved its capital to
Xintian.
The rhetoric is slightly opaque. Xianzi’s view seems to be that the afﬂuence of
the state is of less concern than the health and character of the people. What is
worth noting for our present purposes, though, is that wood was scarce
enough here for a forest to be a proﬁtable ‘treasure’.

The Old South
The middle Yangzi was a different world.42 Most importantly, it was warmer. At
the present day no month in the year has a mean temperature that falls below
zero Celsius in the lowlands. The average annual temperature ranges from 13.5°
to 16° in its northern section, and from 15° to 20° in the southern part. Due to
the inﬂuence of the summer monsoon, the yearly rainfall is from 900 to 1,500
mm or more, the quantity increasing as one moves south. In contrast to the
more alkaline conditions in the north, the soils are either neutral or acid.43
From the point of view of its forests it would be appealing to say that this is the
region in which evergreen broadleaf trees dominate, those that can be thought
of as having leaves mostly glossy on one side, in contrast to the matt ﬁnish of

50

Patterns

most deciduous leaves. This is too simple a formulation: the broadleaf forests
are mixed, and stands of bamboos and distinctive conifers, like the Cunninghamia, important. But it symbolizes something of the shift from a comparatively austere natural world to a richer one.
It was generally recognized in late-archaic times that the state of Chu, in the
central Yangzi valley, had more woods than the states of the Yellow River
valley. In 546 bce, the diplomat Shengzi remarked to the prime minister of
Chu that the senior ministers of the state of Jin were more talented than those
of Chu, from which—though he did not say this—some of them had ﬂed. He
then made his point with a comparison: “It is the same as the way that the
evergreen oak and the catalpa,44 and skins and hides, come from Chu.
Although Chu has these materials, it is Jin that makes use of them.”45 A
handful of lines in the Compositions of Chu, an anthology that took ﬁnal form
in the second century ce but most of whose material is probably several
centuries older, stress the darkness of the Chu forests.46 The richest picture,
though, is that in the rhapsody Master Emptiness by Sima Xiangru, who lived
in the second century bce.47
The intent behind this prose-poem is problematic. That the story it tells is
not presented as factual is evident from the names of most of the characters,
notably ‘Master Emptiness’ himself. My sense of the ﬁrst section translated
here, on hunting by the ruler of Qi, is that it is a mockery of the megalomania
and obsession of ruling-class hunters, but I may be mistaken in this. The
description of the ‘Marshes of Clouds and Dreams’ that follows clearly has an
element of fantasy. It may all the same convey something of the nature of the
wetlands that once lay on either side of the central Yangzi, and probably acted
as natural sponges, absorbing surplus water during ﬂoods and releasing it
slowly during dry spells.
‘Master Emptiness’, so the story goes, was once sent—in preimperial
times—on a mission from the mid-Yangzi state of Chu to the state of Qi on
the northeast coast. He was taken out hunting by the ruler in the grandest
style, both to please him and impress him. He recounts what took place:
The king traveled forth with ten hundred chariots,
Chosen soldiers on foot, and ten thousand horsemen,
To go hunting — along the shores of the ocean.
The ranks of his infantry ﬁlled up the marshlands,
His game-nets extended across the hills.
Rabbits were grabbed, stags squelched in the cart ruts,
Deer skewered with bowshots, unicorns heel-nabbed.
Down to salt-water inlets the huntsmen went rushing,
The fresh meat, cut and salted, discolored their wheels.

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

His shooting on target, the king’s bag was immense.
He ascribed himself merit, puffed up with pride.
Then looked over his shoulder and put me the question:
“Does Chu, too, have such plains, such vast wetlands for venery,
As delightful as this is, and with game as abundant?
Chu’s ruler and me — do his hunts measure up?”
I got down from my chariot, gave him this answer:
“I, your servant, from Chu, have but commoner status.
By luck, ten years and more His Majesty’s guardsman,
I have followed him, oft times, out for amusement.
I have been to the park at the back of the palace
And seen what has happened there, also what hasn’t,
But I’ve not had the chance to see all that there is.
As to marshlands outside, what could I tell you?”
He replied to me then, “If that’s how it is,
Still tell me a little of what you’ve experienced.”
With respect, I responded: “I, your servant, have heard
Seven the marshes Chu’s realm encompasses,
But I’ve seen only one,
Not laid eyes on the others.
And the one I have looked on’s uniquely minute.
The name that it bears is ‘Clouds and Dreams Marshes’.
Clouds and Dreams Marshes are in circumference
Three hundred miles.
In their midst there are mountains.
Labyrinthine their windings,
Sharp-pointed their peaks.
Below the irregular summits and pinnacles
Sun and moon pass occulted in partial eclipse.
In crisscrossing confusion
They oppose the dark clouds.
Stagnant water forms pools, but ﬂows where it slopes,
To submit at the bottom to rivers and streams. . . .
Dark woods rise to its north. Gigantic their trees:
Machilus and camphor,
Pepper, cassia, magnolia,
Wild pear, cork tree, and poplar,
Chestnut, sour pear, date-plum,
Pomelo, and mandarin — spreading sweet fragrance.

51

52

Patterns

And he goes on to describe the animals and birds.
The landscape is essentially imaginary. So if the poem is a benchmark,
describing an archaic environmental richness still untouched by premodern
economic growth, it is one ornamented by literary art into a baroque splendor,
not a dispassionate catalog. But with, it is reasonable to believe, at least a
certain memory of a reality.
What happened to this world? Tracking speciﬁc localities through long
periods of time is a crucial control on generalizations, but difﬁcult. It is
attempted later in this book for three small areas. Here we are still sketching,
and some general impressions at a forest-regional level, caught by snapshots
widely spaced in time, is all that will be undertaken.
Early Chinese imperial civilization made use of many different kinds of
timber, and connoisseurs had a keen appreciation of their appeal to the senses.
Lu Jia, for example. He was chamberlain to the founder of the Han dynasty at
the turn of the third to the second century bce, and wrote as follows in his
New Discourses of the trees of his native Chu:48
Things of ﬁne quality have to be widely known if they are to be prized.
Talents of excellence have to be brought to light if they are to serve any
useful function. What can one use to explain this point?
Well now, the Machilus and camphor are trees famous throughout the
empire. They are born among the deep hills, and are the offspring of the
banks of valleys where the streams ﬂow. When they are standing upright,
they are the patriarchs of the multitudes of trees in the great mountains.
When they lie prostrate, they are of practical use to countless generations.
They are ﬂoated down on the currents of the mountain streams, and emerge
from the dark depths of the wilderness. They follow the courses of the
streams and rivers until they reach one of the capitals.49 Here they submit to
the craftsmanship applied by the ax which brings forth the beauty of their
patterns and hues: unﬂawed and durable, straight-grained, close-packed
and delicate, and of the same quality throughout. Gnawing insects and
worms cannot penetrate them, and being soaked in water does them no
harm. They are ﬂexible when above ground, unyielding when sunk in the
earth. They are lustrous without being oiled, and their elegant beauty is
perfect without carving or painting.
Didactic trees to adorn a courtier’s rhetoric. They are of course a symbol for
ofﬁcials. ‘Oiled’ is a metaphor for receiving favors, and an ‘elegant beauty’ that
needs no improvement suggests in the original Chinese an effortless literary
style. But a certain reality is also evident: the exploitation of the distant
southern forests to supply the raw materials for imperial palaces.

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

53

Some wood for building may even have come from overseas. In the later
second century bce, Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty had a Cypress Beams
Tower constructed out of ‘fragrant cypress’, and used it for drinking parties
and poetry competitions. A later medieval source, often more romantic than
reliable, says that the tower was two hundred feet high and that its odor could
be smelt about ﬁfteen kilometers away. The species most likely to have been
used is thus Chamaecyparis obtusa, which is known for the scent of its wood.
Today, at least, it is native only to Taiwan and Japan, so it was also probably
exotic enough to showcase imperial extravagance, and leave its imprint on the
historian’s pages.50 Thus culture exacts its tribute from nature.
Religion, too. Wood was required for every burial. A hermit–scholar wrote
about the cult of cofﬁns as follows:51
In ancient times, when someone was buried, they would swathe him thickly
in ﬁrewood and inter him in waste land. No mound would be raised, and no
trees planted. Nor was there any ﬁxed time for mourning.
In later generations, the sages changed this to the use of an inner and outer
cofﬁn. The Firmiana simplex tree was used to make the inner cofﬁn, and the
bindings to secure it were Pueraria ﬁbers. The corpse did not contaminate
the springs of water below it, and the stench did not leak out above.
About halfway from that time till now, people shifted to using Catalpa
bungei, Catalpa ovata, sophora, cypress, Cedrela sinensis, and Ailanthus
altissima, in each case according to local conditions. They used glue and
varnish to keep the cofﬁns in shape, to ensure that they were sturdy and
trustworthy. This was all that was needed for the latter to perform their
function reliably.
These days, families of noble status in the capitals always want to have the
wood from an ailanthus, catalpa, or camphor tree from south of the Yangzi
River. Even on the distant frontiers, and in areas with no great pretensions,
people compete in like manner to follow whatever is in fashion.
Now the ailanthus, catalpa, and camphor tree come from extremely far
away. They are chopped down high in the hills, then dragged through the
stripped-bare valleys. They go onto the sea from the mouth of the Yangzi, then
ride back up the River Huai. They next make their way against the current of
the Yellow River, and travel upstream along the Luo to reach the capital at
Luoyang. Carpenters carve and cut them for days and months on end. Multitudes have to be assembled if the timbers are to move. Oxen have to be
numerous if they are to reach their destination. Each log may weigh a quarter
of a tonne, and the work needs tens of thousands of laborers to complete. . . .
Resources are squandered and farming damaged across a vast area.

54

Patterns

The long-distance trade in southern wood for de luxe cofﬁns was presumably
just the visible top of a more extensive business activity.
Other uses of wood were mostly obvious. It was employed for building
houses and boats, bridges, chariots, and carts. It provided the greater part of
tables and beds, tools, utensils, and parts of weapons and musical instruments.
We have also to remember that in the days before paper was widely used,
vertical wooden strips were the commonest medium for writing. The vertical
columns of characters in which paper books were later written, and, later still,
printed, were the ghosts of these vanished strips. They can still be found in
some old-style Chinese books today, especially in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
By the second century of the next millennium, even the Marshes of Clouds
and Dreams were beginning to feel the pressures of the expansion of human
settlement. A vision of the peaceful coexistence of people and wild animals
was still possible, however, though whether it was the survival of an old vision
or a new one born of an urban idealism is impossible for the moment to say.
According to the History of the Later Han, when Fan Xiong took up the post of
prefect of Nan commandery in what is now the province of Hubei:52
The commandery was by the banks of the Yangzi and the Mian rivers, and
included in addition the Marshes of Clouds and Dreams. During the Yongchu
reign-period [107–113 ce] there had been many violent attacks by tigers and
wolves. The previous prefect had offered rewards to recruit people to seize
them in nets, but contrary to what he intended a very large number [of
humans] were killed. Xiong in consequence wrote to the magistrates under
his jurisdiction: “For tigers and wolves to be in the hills and forests is like
human beings living in cities and towns. In the age that attained the perfection of moral transformation in antiquity the ﬁerce beasts gave us no trouble.
This was entirely due to the widespread beneﬁcial inﬂuence of our favor and
good faith, which was such that our empathetic understanding extended to
the birds and beasts. Although I, the prefect, am lacking in charismatic virtue,
how could I dare to neglect this public obligation? Let everyone bear ﬁrmly in
mind that they are to destroy their cages and pit traps, and not irresponsibly
to catch animals in the hills and forests.” After this, deaths from tigers largely
ceased, and people obtained security.
Under the charming story the battle for habitats is apparent.
We move forward to the middle of the ﬁfth century ce, when the Liu Song
dynasty ruled a state based on the lower and middle Yangzi valley. By this time,
nongovernmental economic development had a taken a ﬁrm hold on the more
easily opened areas. The attempt of the authorities to maintain a public

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

55

economic domain to which commoners had only controlled rights of access
for a limited exploitation was collapsing, a centrally important story we shall
return to later, and which was more complex than it appears here.
We also shift downstream. ‘Yangzhou’ at this time was a region centered on
what is today Nanjing. According to the History of the Song:53
The Prefect of Yangzhou . . . reported to the Emperor: “Though the prohibitions regarding the mountains and lakes have been established since times
past, the common people have become accustomed to ignoring them, each
one of them following in this the example of others. They completely burn
off the vegetation on the mountains, build dams across the rivers, and act so
as to keep all the advantages for their families. . . .
Rich and powerful people have taken possession of ranges of hills. The
poor and the feeble have nowhere to gather ﬁrewood or hay. These incursions
are serious abuses that damage good government, and to which the administration should put an end. It should be reafﬁrmed that the old laws that
deﬁned what was beneﬁcial and what harmful are still in force.”
The authorities examined the edict of 336, which said: “To take possession
of the mountains, or to put the marshes under one’s personal protection is
tantamount to robbery with violence. Those who steal more than ten feet of
land are to be beheaded in public.”
Yang Xi demurred: “This system of 336 contains prohibitions that are
rigorous and severe. Since it has been difﬁcult for the people to obey them,
their principles have in practice been eased so as to be in keeping with the
spirit of the times. Nonetheless, taking possession of mountains, and
blocking rivers with dikes, have become more and more common. Because
people copy each others’ bad example, these places have, so to speak,
become their hereditary property. Were we to take back these properties all
of a sudden, this action would provoke anger and resentment.
“We ought now to repeal the old rules and create a system based on the
following ﬁve provisions: As regards the mountains and the wetlands, we
shall not charge with an offense, nor conﬁscate the lands of those who have
become accustomed to clearing them by burning the vegetation, and planting
bamboos and all sorts of fruit in such a fashion that these can renew themselves, and to building dams and lakes, and also barrages to keep captive
river and sea ﬁsh, . . . which they maintain in good repair.
And he goes on to lay down maximum holdings for ofﬁcials of various ranks,
and for commoners, and proposes their properties be recorded in land registers.
The popular economic energy that emerges from this passage conveys an
impression of considerable social and political strength. Enough to push aside

56

Patterns

laws of exceptional ferocity in a century or so. Here is a passing glimpse of
what was a more-than-millennial irresistible program of unofﬁcial, demotic,
clearances, to make space for agriculture, water systems, orchards, and ﬁshfarming. The privatization of the commons.
An important change of gear occurred during the medieval economic revolution in the centuries after about 900 ce. This was the result of the extension of
the inﬂuence of the market for ordinary wood, from the local level, where it
had long existed, to trade over a wider and wider range, with varying patterns
in terms of region and time. To give just one example to illustrate where this
was eventually to lead, a censor memorialized as follows in 1789, near the end
of the late-imperial age, on the trafﬁc traveling north up the Grand Canal:54
The ofﬁcial grain-boats of the Hubei group were late. Investigation revealed
that the cause of this was that the entire group was engaged in dragging
through the water 1,800 mast timbers belonging to the provincial judge Li
Tianpei. . . . If this ofﬁcial has timber for his own use, he ought to have it
transported himself. How can he allocate its transport to the tribute-grain
ships in the hope of economizing on carriage costs and avoiding the
customs duties—so holding up the grain transport?
Good-quality but hardly luxury wood from the middle Yangzi valley was thus
being transported several thousand kilometers, down tributaries and the
Yangzi and then up the Canal,55 in response to demand at the capital. By taking
such transects at widely separated moments in time it is possible to sense a
slow but on the whole cumulative long-term change that must have been
invisible to those living through it.
In the remoter parts of the forest region of the middle and lower Yangzi the
pressures of the market made themselves felt even later. Here is what seems an
illustration of this from 1851. It comes from Tongdao,56 which is in the south of
Hu'nan province. Today it is an autonomous county for the Dong minority
people, hence unlikely in the past to have been fully Han in a cultural sense. In
a place called Camp Baoshan—and the term ‘camp’ in a place-name tends to
signal a non-Han population—the elders created a system to protect their
trees from being overexploited. They left a record of this engraved on a stele:57
Was the vegetation of the forests of these mountains always the way it is
today? No, it was not. A phenomenon whose age is of many centuries has
met with a disaster.
On the mountain of Houlong in Shangxiang, we have always had several
thousands of trees of vast girth. The people of the present time are not of a
quality comparable to those of more remote ages. They have acted in their

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

57

personal interest in cutting down trees in an unreasonable fashion. The result
has been that the beauty of the mountain trees has undergone a change. The
mountains shine as if they had been stripped naked.
This means that we have reached a moment in time when the mountains
have been ruined, the arteries of vitality drained dry, and the spirits of
human beings become inconstant. Our locality is in a state of decomposition and decline for which there is no remedy. Seeing that this decline is
already an accomplished fact, who possesses the power to remedy this situation of rottenness? Or to ﬁnd the means by which the springtime may
return?
All the trees, on all sides of this Camp, must be cared for so that they can
return to a good condition, and then surpass the past, becoming ﬂourishing,
rich, and of great age, such that our children and grandchildren may pass on
their abundance from one to the other without end.
We have now resolved that all the land on Mount Houlong, up to the
summit of its slopes and as far down as the reservoirs, gardens, ﬁelds, and
houses, and toward the interior as far as the crest of Linglou, and toward the
exterior as far as the ﬁelds and reservoirs of Yanchong, shall become
communal land. It will not be permitted either to buy it or sell it. All the trees
of this forest are to be conserved and placed under an interdict. It is forbidden
to fell them in an unreasonable fashion. Those who do not obey this resolution approved by public discussion are wicked thieves. They will be held
responsible, and punished by collective action. . . .
We have decided that the trees around the source of the river at Camp
Baoshan provide it with a comprehensive protection, and that all of them
must be cared for and placed under an interdict. It will not be allowed for
them to be felled in an abusive fashion. Those who disobey will be punished.
We have decided that the second circumscription of Cunninghamia at
Camp Baoshan, and the ﬁrst of Cunninghamia on Mount Maque are to be
communal mountains. They are not to be sold or bought.
We have come a full circle. Here are a people who seem not just to care for
useful trees but to love forests. Who envisage their grandchildren continuing
to live surrounded by the forest. The language of the inscription and not a few
of the characteristic phrases are conventional literary Chinese. The underlying
sentiment comes from somewhere else, from some tradition that was not Han.
A tradition that wanted to maintain forests. That felt that the moral and physical well-being of humans and forests were interdependent.
The inscription raises questions, however, that we are not in a position to
answer conﬁdently. What entitles us to guess that the forest was declining
because of the pressure of commerce?—Mainly the emphasis on stopping

58

Patterns

buying and selling, though strictly speaking the bans apply to land. But there
is also the lament for the recently degraded character of humankind. They
now cut down trees for their ‘personal interest’, which suggests selling the
wood rather than using it for building. Also the recent arrival of markets easy
to access. But we do not know what felling trees in a ‘reasonable’ or ‘unreasonable’ fashion meant to them in practice. We could be cynical, and suspect that
under the ﬁne rhetoric of communal interest the elders were establishing their
own privileged claim to be the only ones to be permitted to cut down timber,
and proﬁt from it.58 This is possible, but one can detect a note of real affection
for the forest that does not seem just rhetoric.
What is unarguable is that it is a symptom of pressure on forest resources
even in remote areas as China entered her modern era.

The Old West
The middle-imperial Chinese economy gradually crystallized into three main
commercial regions until the fading of the medieval economic revolution in
the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries. These were the north China
plain, the lower Yangzi, and the western inland basin of Sichuan.59 The forest
history of the ﬁrst has already been outlined, and the second touched on
tangentially awaiting a fuller treatment in the chapter on Jiaxing. The third
had its own style and pattern. Isolated to the west by the Himalayas, with
difﬁcult access to the central Yangzi valley in the east via the great river-gorges,
and precarious land communications to the old northwest through the manmade ‘gallery roads’, it was part of Chinese history from almost the earliest
period, but at the same time a different world.
At the present day it has a humid and close to subtropical climate, sheltered
by the mountains to its north from the cold polar air masses in winter. Its
mean annual temperatures lie between 16° and 18° Celsius, depending on location. Winter temperatures do not drop to a monthly mean below between 5°
to 8°. Rainfall averages between 1000 and 1300 mm, peaking in the summer,
and the runoff from the mountains ensures abundant water.60
There were two historic centers. The ancient state of Shu, with its center in
the Chengdu plain in the west at a height of 450 to 750 meters above sea level,
was the larger and more important of these. The state of Ba in the east, at a
height of 300 to 500 meters, was the other, in the region around what is today
the city of Chongqing just above the upper entrance to the gorges.
Present-day surveys show the main trees divide as follows into conifers and
broadleafs respectively: ﬁr, spruce, pine, ‘oil-pine’ (Keteleeria), larch, hemlock,

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

59

cunninghamia, metasequoia, and cypress; and camphor, catalpa, Phoebe and
Machilus, oak, lithocarpus, beech, birch, alder, hornbeam, chinquapin, maple,
lime, poplar, and paulownia. In the warmer climate following the end of the
last ice age, pollen analysis also shows plentiful windmill or fan palms (Trachycarpus). To these should be added fruits such as mandarin, orange, pomelo,
crab apple, and lichee, as well as the lacquer tree and the tea bush. Sichuan was
the ﬁrst area in the world to cultivate tea systematically. One tea plantation
from Tang times is said to have employed 900 workers.61
In this section, the focus is on clarifying the nature of the pressures that
reduced the forest resources of a region almost totally covered in trees in
archaic times, and that did so in spite of unusually strong efforts to cultivate
economically useful sources of wood. Some of these effects are unsuspected.
One, for example, is books. Sichuan in the late Tang was the ﬁrst region to
produce woodblock printed books on any signiﬁcant scale. Under the Song, a
Daoist compendium was printed of about 130,000 pages in over 5,000 fascicules, as well as the world’s ﬁrst paper money. This created a demand for the
paper mulberry tree, the ‘silk thorn’ (Cudrania tricuspidata), and bamboos, for
use in the manufacture of paper. Pear and ‘mountain pear’ were needed for
cutting the wooden blocks.62
Another distinctive demand came from the bamboo engineering used for
the tube-wells introduced in the eleventh century to extract brine and natural
gas, to some extent superseding the older broad-diameter wells. Bamboo also
found a role in the hawser bridges over rivers too difﬁcult to cross by less
heroic means.
More familiar pressures were clearance for farming, fuel for domestic use
and proto-industries, and engineering—whether derricks over brine wells,
gallery roads, or installations in irrigation systems.
The ﬁrst chapter of the story may be summarized as follows:
Once iron axes began to be available, some time after the middle of the ﬁrst
millennium bce, Sichuan became a prodigal user of wood. A recently excavated grave from the Warring States period used about 100 cubic meters of
Machilus, some of it in the form of beams over 9 meters long.63 By Han times
timber was being ﬂoated downstream in rafts.64 A gazetteer on the area
completed in 347 ce reported that: “The Min hills have plenty of catalpas,
cypresses, and large bamboos. Denudation follows the courses of the streams.
The logs are cut and trimmed into timber.65 The effort required is moderate,
and the uses to which it can be put richly rewarding.”66
A detailed picture can be brushed in by the third century ce, when Zuo Si
wrote rhapsodic descriptions of each of the capitals of the Three Kingdoms.
That on Chengdu, the capital of the Sichuan region, gives a description of the

60

Patterns

Min River basin at the end of the early imperial period.67 Zuo criticizes some
of the earlier examples of this type of poem for making mistakes with trees
and animals, and even deities, ascribing them to areas where they were not
found. He aimed at a greater realism, he said, and explicitly states that he is
modeling his work on the earlier Rhapsodies on the Two Capitals by Zhang
Heng. In these, he says in his preface, “hills, rivers, and cities can be examined
as if they are on a map, and the birds, animals, vegetation, and trees may be
veriﬁed as if in a local gazetteer.”68 Writers of lyric verses, he asserts, “sing of
what their hearts are set upon,” but “those who, mounting the heights, can
compose descriptive rhapsodies, praise what they observe.”69 In principle, at
least, truth was the target.
The main passages of Zuo’s poem that touch on vegetation and trees show
an environment busily exploited but still not yet spoiled by the process. He
begins by noting that the city drew on a wide hinterland:
Here trafﬁc by water and land converges.
People crisscross and meet, from all points of the compass.
Here is rich vegetation — almost a surfeit —
Thickly thatched every which way, abundantly ﬂourishing.
To the south lay a humid world with a great variety of trees:
Valleys hug one like arms; gullies close round like mouths.
Crests, straight-ridged or circling, are tangled and twisting,
Interposing their rocks and deﬂecting the clouds,
The dense forests a haze under bluish-green mists,
The lone summits imposing, rising uplifted.
Then he turns to the trees that grow here, mostly evergreen broadleafs:
Sturdy multiply-knotted bamboos climb up the ranges of mountains.
The cinnamon-cassias gaze — down on the cliffs far below them.
From rifts traversing the slopes, are dragon’s-eye trees, springing out.
Likewise, from cracks in the banks, there are lichee trees growing.
Their green foliage masses like clouds, when they thicken.
Their fruits swell, and hang widely scattered, red-purple.
Yet when winter’s most chill, still their leaves do not wither,
But shine, splendid as ever, amazingly verdant.
Peacocks roaming about and kingﬁshers ﬂitting in multitudes,
Rhinoceros striving with elephant — to determine who canters more
swiftly —
In the dawn, the white pheasant’s cry — foretelling ill luck,
In the darkness of night, lugubrious howling by gibbons.

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

61

The ‘multiply-knotted bamboos’ were Qiong bamboos, often used for walking
sticks. What I have called the ‘cinnamon-cassia’ was a ‘cassia’ whose bark was
said to roll up like a length of bamboo, which suggests the Chinese cinnamon,
the bark from whose smaller branches when shaved off will dry into quills or
tubes in the sun. The ‘dragon’s-eye tree’ is the long'an (Nephelium longana), a
fruit tree that often grows where the lichee does.
Looking to the north of Chengdu, Zuo observes:
Up north, in the Valley of Bao, is where one can gather good timber.
Among the trees here there are found the magnolia and cinnamon,
Two kinds of catalpa, the narrow-leaved osier, and Fortune’s paulownia,70
Firs and thorn-bearing junipers, windmill palm trees and coconuts.
Machilus and camphor lie hidden, deep on the valley-ﬂoor bottoms,
While magniﬁcent cypress, and pine, ﬂourish up on the mountainous tops,
Their long trunks and their branches uplifted, so high as to be unbelievable,
Fanning the clouds ﬂying by as they brush on the substanceless aethers.
The presence of the windmill or fan palm this far north at this time is
surprising but perhaps not impossible. Pollen analysis shows it was common
in Sichuan in the warmer climate of 10 000 bp.71 The presence of the coconut
deﬁes credulity, but I have not altered the sense of the text arbitrarily as the
dictionaries and Qu Taiyuan’s commentary all agree on it. The ‘thorn-bearing
juniper’ is unclear but may be Juniperus rigida, one Japanese name for which
is ‘rat-thorn’.72 The point of these verses is that, by this period, Chengdu’s
catchment area for timber extended at least three hundred kilometers north
from the city. Bao was on the border with Shaanxi province.
The city itself was still something of an island among settled but non-Han
people. Among those trees and shrubs to the east
Are cathartic croton-oil beans, and the antitoxic euphorbia,
And the ‘tree of lively old age’ for canes, the red-skinned peach-bamboo.
Gardens, where vegetables are grown, ring round their homesteads like
cordons,
And along their property boundaries are located saline pools.
To the west, although the people had become civilized,
In this waste-land, distant from settlements, darkness lurks under the weeds,
And the forests along the mountains’ feet are sunk in the dappled shadows.
Here, alternating life and death, there grow the twin-trunk trees,
While, hidden beneath the earth, swell the roots of the edible taro.
The mythical ‘life-and-death-alternating tree’ was believed to have two trunks,
one of which was alive in any given year and the other dead. The following year
the two trunks exchanged roles.

62

Patterns

The surroundings of the city were an immense man-made garden. At the
heart of the production system was the irrigation network which used gravity
to distribute the water diverted from the Min River down a gentle slope to
ﬁelds, and then to collect it and remove it at the bottom:
Within the bounds of its domain
There are banked mounds, rich piedmonts, wetlands, and plains
Spreading as far as the eyes can range,
Made moist by the Qian and the Mei, whose ﬂow is in part subterranean,
And water supplied by the Mian and the Luo, spilling over in inundations.
Branching off, like a body’s arteries, there extend the canals and channels,
Marking out the ﬁelds’ limits, like inlaid metal, or openwork silk with
patterns.
Bright-shining here, and plentiful, are both the sorghum and millet,
And the nonglutinous rice — has stalks that are serried, and thick.
They regard their inlets for irrigation as gateways down from the clouds,
Their reservoirs make provision of water, out of dry land, through
distributaries.
Even the moon in the star-zone Bi, which provokes torrential showers,
Still cannot yield the equivalent — of this liquid — in bringing fertility.73
In complete contradiction to what Max Weber maintained, more than any
premodern northwestern Europeans, the Chinese were driven by a desire for the
rational mastery of the world. Here, freedom from the uncertainties of the weather.
The outer suburbs were ﬁlled with fruit trees:
Looking across at each other, the roof-slopes rise to beamed ridges.
Homes touch one another, adjacent, under mulberry trees and catalpas.
Families can draw up their brine — from wells that tap salty springs;
Households have orchards whose pride is having both grapefruits and
mandarins.74
Their gardens have loquats, red Hubei crab apples,
Pears from the mountains, persimmons, and sweet-tasting oranges,
Mountain peaches as well, planted out in straight ranks,
And plums, common and mume, patterned net-like and orderly.
These diverse kinds of fruit trees, their bud-cases bursting,
Are alike in their splendor, contrasting in color.
In springtime the red cherry’s blossoms come ﬁrst;
White crab-apple ﬂowers are full-blown in summer.

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

63

When the seventh-month Firestar inaugurates autumn,
The cold wind gets an edge,
While white dews condense,
And miniature crystals of frost begin forming.
Purple pears are awash then with succulent juices.
Fine ﬁssures appear in the hazelnuts’ shells.
As bunched grapes, over-ripe, rot to gunge in confusion,
Pomegranates compete to split open their fruits.
Their sweet ﬂavor endures till they gently drop off,
The strength of their perfume oppressing our nostrils.
This passion for cultivating trees has to be put into counterpoint, not contrast,
with the passion for clearing untamed forests. Arboriculture is a part of the
enterprise of bringing landscapes under horticultural and hydrological control.
Chengdu was also a commercial suction pump that drew in goods from a
wide hinterland, with an unavoidable impact on its environment, including
trees. At this period, trade in Chinese cities was generally concentrated in
specially dedicated centers, to facilitate political supervision and taxation:
We turn to the secondary city next,
Which adjoins the main one to its west.
Here markets, and stores, are concentrated
To form an ocean of countless traders,
Bazaar-ﬁlled alleys repeated in hundreds,
Stalls like meshes of nets a thousand-fold multiplied,
Goods and commodities stacked up like hills,
Lovely, subtly made, objects — like stars in their millions.
Men of standing, and ladies, who live in the capital,
Come, tastefully dressed, to observe others’ fashions.
And the businessmen who are locally based dispose of their piled-high
stocks,
Using the pell-mell confusion as cover — for dealing with buyers
improperly.
Weird, little-known, is their merchandise, or else it’s unique curiosities,
All eight points of the compass supply them — with heretofore never seen
objects.
Thus, among fabrics for clothing on sale, there is cotton from the
southwest,
And — among the edible starches — ground-up pith from the palm tree
Arenga.

64

Patterns

Cotton came from a place called Yongchang, which is now in Yunnan but was
then outside the Chinese cultural sphere. It was not to be cultivated on any
scale in China for another thousand years. The sugar palm Arenga saccarifera
grows wild in Burma and Assam, but may have already been being planted in
south China at this time as it certainly was later.75 Thus, even at this early date
the fate of such trees was being determined by consumers who were at least a
thousand kilometers distant.
After this age of prosperity, Sichuan went into an economic decline from the
fourth to the sixth centuries, the period of colder temperatures. Recovery
came under the Tang and the Song, when what remained of the original forest
cover in the basin and the lower hills was cleared for farming. Farmers thus
had increasingly to grow their own ﬁrewood. Alder saplings were favored,
being said to be able to double their size in three years, and the common
people were reported to “rely upon using them, substituting them for other
ﬁrewood.”76 Du Fu, perhaps China’s greatest poet, spent time in Chengdu
during the 760s, and wrote several couplets that refer to alders. They reveal the
Sichuanese people’s custom of planting groves of trees and bamboos round
their homes. Thus Du wrote to a friend in ofﬁcial life, thanking him for
providing him with some alders:77
West of the moat, round my thatched hall, there was missing a grove of
trees,
And who was there, other than you, aware of my deep-hidden feelings?
I’ve been happy to hear that alder saplings can reach a good height in
three years
And will make me an acre or so of shade, along the bank, by the creek.
Not long afterward, in a poem called “The hall completed,” he wrote:78
My grove of alders blocks off the sun. The breeze sighs through the
boscage.
The huge bamboos blend with the mists, their tips bedewed with droplets.
The commentary to the ﬁrst of these poems quotes a work on the Shu region
that says: “To the east of Mount Yulei there are numerous alder trees. They
come easily to maturity and can serve as ﬁrewood.” Mount Yulei was some way
north of the city of Chengdu.
In Song times, some scholars and ofﬁcials had a passion for planting trees.
Su Dongpo, self-inﬂating and exaggerating, once described himself as the only
person who had a taste for pines:79

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

65

Others love willows and elms, when they’re planting new trees.
They wait for their acres of shade, and recline at their ease.
It’s my growing of pines and of cypress that makes me unique:
These are trees that protect the integrity — of the heart’s feelings.
Pines were something special to him. He estimated that he had in his younger
days planted “ten thousand of them by hand.”80 Why? Speaking later of his
youth in Sichuan with the wry skepticism of maturity, he wrote a self-mocking
poem that gives some hints.81 They had had for him an association with the
Daoist quest for physical immortality. In other words it is important not to
think of him—and others of this period—as just environmental rationalists
with a touch of romanticism, although as he grew older the rational element
seems to have become stronger. Part of his way of thinking about the world
was, by our standards, extremely strange.
The humor of the poem depends on a tension: the understanding shared
between author and reader that while the unmagical realities of everyday life
tend to thwart our fumbling efforts to make our bodies incorruptible, we even
so persist, perhaps perversely—who knows?—in loving the dream. Planting
large numbers of pines may be classiﬁed, from our modern perspective, as
reforestation, but pines in his mind were not just pines. Once, at least, they were
embodiments of a magical world immanent in the mundane one, seemingly
ever-present, yet tantalizingly impossible to grasp.
In times now long gone by, when I was young,
I planted the whole of the Eastern Ridge with pines.
I re-rooted the saplings, the length of my thumb,
— As tricky a task as pricking out rice.
In year two they extruded Long Life’s yellow sprouts,
Piercing through, one by one, like awn-spikes on wheat.
In the third, artemisia from Faery came out
— Then the hills were invaded by cattle and sheep!
How fondly I hoped, when not ten years had passed,
Soon to see them extending like dragons or serpents,
But a night-storm, tempestuous, smashed them to fragments,
Though the dew-fall at dawn was scented like pearls.
I hacked down, since I wanted to eat my pines’ resin,
Five score mulberry trees, to mix in their cinders.
But human affairs are contrary and vexed,
And elusive the elixir potent with spirit!82

66

Patterns

Frustrated in his attempts to concoct the right recipe, he ends by hoping that
by reﬁning certain substances associated with pines, he might still attain an
imperishable bodily substance:
Once my Three Corporeal Presences are extinguished, like dead ash,
The Five Cereals cleansed from my guts, their ancient consistency changed,
Then a green marrow will congeal, within my bones’ bluish-black,
And my abdomen’s Cinnabar Field be shining and subtly radiant.
There’s no need to dwell on the fact that the hair on my head will be white,
And the pupils, in both my eyes, have been caused to become quite square.
An Immortal, once ﬁve hundred years have taken their course and gone by,
I shall mount on a crane and return — to the homeland whence I once came!
We cannot be certain what his ‘real’ thoughts were. Perhaps a superposition of
belief and disbelief?
He certainly cared about pines. The magistrate of Macheng, northeast of
Hankou in Hubei, had, Su said, “planted tens of thousands of pine trees along
the roads, surrounding them with shade.” In less than a decade, axes and ﬁres
had left less than thirty to forty per cent of them alive. He therefore wrote a
poem of rebuke about this, being, he said, “painfully concerned that generations to come will not continue to support the magistrate’s intentions.”83 But
this was clearly a matter of amenity, not the restoration of the forests, nor
magical longevity.
Let us return to more mundane activities.
Wood and bamboo were the structural basis of most premodern Chinese
engineering. The Records of the Country South of Mount Hua, completed in 347
ce, refer to bamboo tubing used to store and transfer the natural gas from
wells of the region around present-day Chongqing:84
There are ﬁre wells in Jiang whose light blazes up into the sky at night.
When people want to set this ﬁre alight, they apply the ﬁre from their home
hearth to it, and before another instant has passed there is a sound like
thunder, and ﬂames shoot forth and light up the land for ten miles or so
around. Bamboo tubes are used to hold a store of this light, which can be
transported by dragging,85 and will not go out all day long.
In the eleventh century the traditional broad-gauge brine wells of the
Sichuanese salt industry, dug with shovels, were mostly replaced by drilled
narrow-gauge wells. Su Dongpo left the following account of the technology.
I have interpreted his sometimes opaque terminology in a few places:86

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

67

After the period 1041 to 1053, tube-wells ﬁrst began to be created in Sichuan.
A circular bit is used to drill an opening the size of a bowl. The deepest of
them go down several hundred feet. They remove the septs from large
bamboos and slot them into each other to form the well. Fresh water is
injected from the side into the space between the tube and the wall of the
shaft, so that the brine rises of its own accord up the tube in the center.
Furthermore, they use a bamboo slightly smaller in diameter than those
of the tube, which is repeatedly extracted from and reinserted into the well
as a bucket. It is bottomless and yet blockable. A ﬂap of a few inches of cured
leather is attached as a ﬂap-valve. As the tube comes out of and goes into the
water, the aether of its own accord blows it shut or sucks it open. One tube
can handle several dou-measures of water.
All tube-wells use lifting machinery. No one is unaware of where proﬁt is
to be found. The History of the Later Han mentions a water-driven ﬂapbellows. This technique is used in the iron-smelteries of Sichuan, and has an
overall resemblance to the water-extracting tubular buckets of the Sichuan
brine wells.
Su Dongpo’s model for explaining the shutting and opening of the valve was
thus, it seems, the metallurgical single-ﬂap bellows that used ﬂap-valves to
draw air into and then expel it out of a rectangular chamber linked to the
furnace by an exit duct.87 The Song-dynasty dou is a tricky measure to evaluate,
but 5.85 liters seems the most reasonable.88
We move on from the period of the medieval economic revolution to the
last phase of the late-imperial age, noting in passing the coverage given by the
late-Ming technological survey Heaven and the Artiﬁcer Develop Commodities.
This contains a detailed account of the brine wells and fourteen panels of
woodcut illustrations added during the Manchu dynasty.89 Our last source, The
Classic of the Waterways of Sichuan, was completed in 1794. It incorporates
material from a range of dates, but its descriptions of the salt wells and natural
gas wells near the junction of the Min River with the Yangzi, some way south
of Chengdu, seem contemporary:90
Beside Lion Bridge,91 east of the Looking-Four-Ways brook, are salt works.
Of the several tens of counties in Sichuan that produce salt, only Great
Peace, Brine Water, and Cave Source obtain it from a ﬂowing current that
never ceases day or night, like a source from a spring. The others all make
salt derived from wells.
The two wells at Cloud Peace and Warm Water have circumferences that
are, respectively, several tens of feet for the larger and several feet for the

68

Patterns

smaller. They resemble household wells, and are drawn from every day
without becoming exhausted. All that is needed is once a year to clean out
the mud that has accumulated.
The salt wells at Bullock’s Work, Easy Wealth, and North Of The Stream
are all over a hundred feet in depth, and their pierced openings are reached
by means of bamboo. The septs have been removed from these bamboo
tubes, and on their bottoms is basted a ﬂap of ox-hide that opens and shuts
of its own accord. It opens when it enters the water; and when ﬁlled with
water, it closes, not letting even a drop escape. Up above the well they erect
pulleys that are made to operate by oxen and horses pulling on ropes.92
These wells are drilled by ingenious craftsmen who have a good knowledge of the subterranean arteries carrying the brine. They do not dig open
the ground when drilling, but use a pointed iron bit ﬁve feet in length that
bores the hole from above. A bamboo cable winds and rewinds the bit,
causing it to fall repeatedly. Its strength is like that of an arrow from a bow,
and it falls as straight as a plumb line, penetrating both stone and mud. It
takes a number of years to drill a well to completion.
They will then, as usual, remove the septs from large bamboos and socket
them into each other to make the tube for the well of the same length as the
well is deep. They pour fresh water into the transverse gap between the tube
and the wall of the well, and the brine rises of its own accord.
Generally, when a well has been in operation for a long time, or when the
fresh water has seeped into the brine, they will calk the ﬁssures in the tube.
If other unwanted matter blocks or contaminates the brine, they will
remove the blockage, even if it is a thousand feet below the ground. . . .
All the wells at North Of The Stream are brine wells. Some of those at
Bullock’s Work and Easy Wealth are ﬁre wells. In general the nature of a ﬁre
well is that of cold pertaining to the Dark Force. If ordinary domestic ﬁre is
brought into contact with it, it will make a noise like a roll of thunder, and
ﬁre will come forth from it. One extinguishes it by snufﬁng it out with a
piece of cloth, but some of the cold aether will remain inside.
When the base of this sort of ﬁre is only an inch or so above the ground, it
is extremely narrow, but as it rises it gradually ﬂares out until it can be as much
as several feet across. The tip of the ﬂame is not like that of a normal ﬁre.
It can be used as fuel to boil brine, steam rice, calcine limestone to make
lime, or to smother-burn wood to convert it to charcoal. When it is drawn
through an opening in a bamboo tube to serve as a substitute for ﬁrewood
or candles, this aperture is smeared with clay. Thus it burns hotly at the
mouth but the bamboo does not catch ﬁre. At other times it is drawn off
into the bladder of a pig, the opening sealed, and the bladder placed inside

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

69

a box or bag that one can take home with one. When night falls, one pierces
a hole with a needle, applies an ordinary domestic ﬂame, and ﬁre will come
out of the bladder and light up the room.
There are also oil wells. The color of the oil is turbid, but it burns well and
one can have a ﬁre anywhere. It will not diminish or go out in wind or rain,
or even when plunged into water. If one is traveling at night, and stores oil in
a bamboo tube, it is possible to travel for one or two kilometers on a single
tube. . . . Such wells are commonplace, and no cause for astonishment.
So parts of this region of late-premodern China not only used gas for industrial
processes, but had domestic gas cookers, domestic gas lighting, and a primitive
form of mobile illumination using bottled oil. All based on bamboo tubing.
Once again, as with the large-scale logging in the Zhongnan mountains,
there is something of the feel of an emerging modern economy about this
technical vigor and virtuosity, yet no certain evidence that anything was in fact
in the process of happening to make economic modernity a reality.
Sizable structures were fashioned from wood and bamboo. The Classic of the
Waterways of Sichuan lists three methods used for cable bridges. The precise
details of the techniques used are not easy to determine with conﬁdence, but
the amounts of timber and bamboo used to make and maintain them is the
important point:93
(1) Two trees are ﬁrst set upright in the middle of the river to serve as
columns. The bridge is built as a framework on top of them. Bamboos are
used to make cables, closely interlaced into the framework and secured to the
two banks. Sometimes stones will be dropped into lengths of large bamboo
until they are ﬁlled, and a rope attached to their tops. A bamboo hawser is
plaited into this rope and spans the banks. Wood is used to make machinery.
When the rope grows slack, this machinery is rotated to wind it in.
In other words there was a winch and a counterweight.
(2) There is also a bridge featuring a spanning-cable and a ‘climbing pole’.
Where the great river’s water speeds as swiftly as an arrow, a bridge is made
by attaching a rope to the sides of the two banks. A tree is hollowed out to
make the ‘pole’ through which the rope is threaded. The traveler is lashed on
top of it, and uses his hands to pull himself along the rope to the opposite
bank, where there are people standing by to release his bonds. It is exceedingly dangerous.
The third type is the only one whose dimensions are given. A sort of suspension bridge, it seems close to being unbelievably enormous:

70

Patterns

(3) The rope bridge is 1200 feet in length, and divided into ﬁve frames. Its
width is made up of twelve ropes running along in parallel but linked like
the scales of a ﬁsh. A woven bamboo mesh is spread on top of them. Several
tens of large trees are forced by joint efforts into the river’s deposited sediments, and stones dragged up to consolidate them at the base.
Every few trees form a frame. They suspend the bridge in mid-air between
them. When a ﬁerce wind blows past it, it swings agitatedly up and down. It
broadly resembles the shape of a ﬁsherman’s net spread out to dry in the
sun, or the multicolored silk from a dyer’s household drying away from the
light.94 People have to leave their carrying chairs and hurry across on foot.
The slightest dawdling and they will collapse in fright, unable to proceed.
Engineering here was based on forest products.

The Far South
The region south of the southern ranges (that is, the Far South) was conquered
by the Qin and Han dynasties from the Yue or Viet people more than two
thousand years ago. The part that remains in China today forms the provinces
of Guangdong and Guangxi. The present climate is subtropical verging on
tropical. The mean annual temperature ranges from about 18° to 24° Celsius.
The yearly rainfall for most areas lies between 1500 and 2000 mm. It is thus
warm and wet. The east-to-west mountains to its north protect it against cold
winter air moving down from the north, and the reservoir of heat in the sea
tends to stabilize the weather.
Seasonally, rainfall is concentrated in the summer; the winter being relatively dry, cold, and clear. Regional variations are also important. The winds are
stronger along the coast than inland, and it is the coastal zone that bears the
brunt of the typhoons that come in off the ocean. About four of these each
year move onshore, and of these four only about two are classed as ‘major’, that
is, with wind speeds over 117 kilometers per hour.95 They are, however, terrifying experiences, as anyone who has been in one knows.
Botanically, the far south of China in historic times had as much in
common with the tropical worlds that lay further south as it did with central
China. Already by 304 ce, Ji Han had written The Forms of the Plants and Trees
of the South because, as he said, “the people of the central regions are often
unfamiliar with their nature.”96
In many ways, the Far South was an exotic and bewildering experience for
northerners. They found, for example, Chinese spinach97 being grown on tethered rafts, and fabrics woven from the ﬁbers of banana plants and bamboos.98
And novel foods and addictions, like the chewing of betel nut.

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

71

Betel is the fruit of the betel-nut palm,99 and the fruit is chewed together
with the leaf of the betel-pepper100 and lime, often ground from oyster shells.
It produces a mild intoxication, and is thought to improve the digestion. The
saliva of those indulging in it becomes red, and is often spat out. The addiction seems harmless, but, to most tastes, unaesthetic.
The trees can grow over a hundred feet high, with trunks that have an
almost constant girth from bottom to top. They have no branches until the fan
of leaves shaped like banana leaves that spreads out from the highest point,
and the partially enfolding bracts, or spathes, that contain the fruit. Su
Dongpo was exiled to the Far South in 1094 to serve as a county magistrate,
this being his punishment for some politically incorrect remarks at court. The
ﬁrst part of his poem “Eating Betel” evokes the surprise of the observant
outsider confronting this novel world:101
The moon shines down on the branchless trunks of the forest
Whose nighttime columns rise on tens of thousands of plinths.
High up among the cloudbanks wave the distant fans of fronds
Covering us with darkness, in this summer heat just before winter.
From aloft the spathes droop down, enclosing their load of fruits,
Each fruit-base ringed with red spines, providing for its defense.
During rain at night one might think one glimpsed the azure dragon’s
brood,
Or else imagine them, in the wind, to be purple phoenix eggs.
Once they have dropped to the earth, looking as if they are splitting,
They continue to ripen on their own, encased within their skins.
When a visitor from the north arrives he ﬁnds them unfamiliar,
But when urged by local custom to eat, it is hard for him to resist!
One is nervous of letting off gas from one’s hollow internal places,
And as one takes one’s ﬁrst bite, one may well half-want to spit.
When one sucks upon the juices, one detects a faint sugary taste,
But when one lets one’s teeth sink in, the ﬂavor is also bitter.
If someone’s facial demeanor has become too severe and cold,
The savor no longer conveys its old seductive sweetness.
For removing assertive arrogance it merits an encomium,
Yet when it gives one a boost, one’s courage deserves esteem.
Often, when stubborn malarial fever sets in and will not vanish,
Betel is the restorative that leads back to healthy vigor.
Of the medicines we have in reserve, it may well be one of the handiest,
And, in the catalog of fruits, are there any more beneﬁcial?

72

Patterns

A new landscape, with new ﬂora and foods, and new mood-altering and
medical drugs.
For late-imperial times, Qu Dajun’s miscellany New Comments on Guangdong, completed in 1700, gives descriptions of the more important species of
trees.102 The book is an idiosyncratic mixture of the styles of the sober local
gazetteer and the traditional credulity-teasing book of marvels. To be used
with caution. Here, though, are parts of his largely unproblematic entry on the
banyan, that extraordinary member of the ﬁg family where one tree becomes
an entire grove:103
The banyan has luxuriant foliage, and its boughs and branches hang down
like vines one after the other. A trunk can reach a size such that three men
are needed to encompass it in their arms. The branches sprout rootlets that
brush against the ground in unbroken sequence to gain invigoration from
the soil and stones. These roots in their turn put forth branches. After this
has happened repeatedly, the branches and trunks are so entangled with
each other that there is no above or below. Everything interlocks.
To begin with, the rootlets grow like hundreds and thousands of hanging
silk threads. After a long time, these hundreds and thousands fuse into one,
or perhaps two or three, then one by one descend to the ground like beams
and columns that prop each other up. From the distance some of these trees
seem like great mansions, with the straight elements becoming doors, and
the curved ones windows. They form an openwork lattice through which
one can look in all four directions. . . .
One of its names is the ‘tree that grows upside down’. Many of the trunks
are hollow inside. They lack solidity and cannot be used for anything [structural]. For this reason, wherever people have formed village communities,
they let these trees live out their natural span. The largest attain several
hundred years of age. Thus, when one sees from far off tall trees clustering
thickly around their homesteads, those that rise straight up are the silkcotton trees (Ceiba pentandra),104 while the huge bushy ones growing crosswise and downward are the banyans. . . .
And he goes on to mention how banyan twigs were used when dried to make
kindling that would not go out, even in wind and rain, and how the sap from
banyan rootlets could be used like lacquer. Banyans were planted beside roads
to provide shade, and around the places where periodic markets met, in the
belief that they would make them prosper. Some trees had even been observed
to predict a coming disaster by emitting a smoky white vapor. . . .
The silk-cotton or kapok tree was another spectacular sight:105

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

73

Its branches stick out in pairs, clutching and grasping into space, giving it
the aspect of a dragon spreading its wings. Buds appear in the ﬁrst lunar
month, as plump as those of the magnolia, either deep red or golden yellow,
the stamens having six stalks. From a distance they look like an innumerable
multitude of colored lanterns burning in space and reddening it everywhere. . . .
The fruits are the size of betel nuts, ripening in the ﬁfth and sixth lunar
months. When one splits into two, ﬂoss ﬂies out from inside it into the air as
if it were snow. This ﬂoss is brittle, though, rather than tough and ﬂexible,
and ﬁt to use as wadding but not for weaving. It can be used to stuff cushions
and kneepads, and is better for this purpose than the reed-tufts from between
the Yangzi and Huai rivers. Sometimes it is made into a cloth called ‘tie’ or
‘rough cloth’ that can keep out the rain. Northerners think highly of it.
Inside the ﬂoss there are seeds like those of the Firmiana, which are
carried with it, whirling hither and thither. When they make contact with
the soil, they turn into trees once more. . . .106
The oldest trees are the ten or more in front of the shrine in Nanhai. In
the second lunar month each year, on the morning of the birthday of the
God of Fire, their blossoms are open to the fullest extent, and up to several
thousand people will be present to look at them. The energy of the light is
overwhelmingly brilliant. It reﬂects off the spectators’ faces as if they had
been dyed red-brown.
When the blossoms are out, there are no leaves. They appear once the
blossoms have fallen. . . . Before the leaves are out, the trees really look like
corals a hundred feet in height. . . . Their wood is of no use, so they are little
harmed by axes. They are also the dwellings of demons and spirits, and a
medium for geomantic forces. It is for these reasons that the height of most
of them matches that of the banyans.
The author of the New Comments on Guangdong notes elsewhere that
“numerous sugar palms,107 fan palms,108 and silk-cotton trees are planted beside
shrines, numerous ‘rosary limes’109 by Buddhist temples, numerous banyans by
village community altars, and numerous water-pines110 and lichee trees beside
reservoirs formed by dams.”111 In other words, the Cantonese of this period had
a number of companion trees, with a special spiritual signiﬁcance. Some of
them were also economically useful. The sugar palm, for example, yielded an
edible white ﬂour from the pith inside its bark.
How does this relate to observations made earlier about the apparent lack of
any speciﬁc Chinese deities for trees, let alone forests? We can only guess, but
where trees and forests did have a numinous quality in the Chinese world of

74

Patterns

late-imperial times, it seems likely to have originated from outside the world
of classical Han Chinese culture, at least as narrowly deﬁned. There is a hint of
this in a passage from the Record of Jingzhou, written back in the ﬁfth century
ce.112 ‘Jingzhou’ was an old name for the south-central region of China,
including the northern part of Guangdong province. The passage refers to a
time more than half a millennium earlier when this last-mentioned area was
still inhabited mainly by the Nan Yue people, who were of course not Hans:113
There were camphor trees in Yangshan county in Shixing commandery
whose diameter could reach twenty feet. They were designated ‘sacred trees.’
At the time of the Qin dynasty, the Qin forces cut down these trees to make
cylinders for drums. Once these drum cylinders were ﬁnished, they abruptly
hurried off north to Guiyang.114
Nothing is said about why the camphor trees were sacred, or ‘sage-like’ to
translate the text more pedantically. But it was the troops of the ﬁrst Chinese
emperor who cut them down, untouched by their quasi-divine qualities. Or at
least so it would seem. The passage implies that it was the size of the trees that
was their attraction, not any mystical properties with which they could endow
a musical instrument.
A few true forest peoples still existed in the seventeenth century when the
New Comments were written, even if only at the environmental margins. Thus
the aborigines of Hainan Island ranged through their woods looking for the
perfume that developed under certain conditions from the eaglewood tree115
and has been called by various names such as ‘garu wood’ and ‘lignaloes’.
Demand was driven by trade, some of it non-Chinese. Getting this precious
commodity out caused a certain amount of forest destruction, and induced a
state of economic dependency among the tribes having the ownership of the
lands where it could be found. Here is part of Qu Dajun’s account:116
Collecting the perfume has always to be done among the tangles of fallen
dead trees in the depths of the mountains. They go in groups of several tens
of people and may ﬁnd it in a day or two on some occasions, but on others
return with empty hands after half a month. The likely explanation is that
some supernatural power is at work.
When the weather is ﬁne and dry at the height of the fall, they look at all
the mountain trees that have withered, both large and small, since it is always
these that contain the perfume. They search by moonlight for any scented
vapor wafting through the woods, and use straw ties to mark its presence.
If there are termite mounds117 two or three feet high in these places, they
are certain to obtain ‘oilswift’118 and jia'nan, but lignaloes in greater quantity

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

75

still. After the knots of the tree have been slumbering in the soil for a long
time, they exude a liquid, and once this has congealed, the strata of perfume
will be below it. . . .
Trees like the evergreen Ilex pedunculosa vary in size, and perfume is
found in less than one or two out of every hundred. Sometimes the perfume
congeals in the trunk and branches, but at others in the roots, just as an
ulcer grows at some times in the upper half of the human body, and at
others in the lower. A person’s appearance becomes gaunt and haggard
when he or she has been harmed by a disease. When the perfume has
brought afﬂiction on a tree, its leaves and branches [likewise] wither and
decay. It happens that when the winds and rains have splintered them, and
their resinous sap has been splashed onto other trees, like the transmission
of infection during an epidemic, the perfume will congeal in the latter as
well after much time has passed.
Whenever the aboriginal people see yellowed leaves telling them that
perfume has already congealed in a tree, they will cut it down, open a
trackway, and remove it as their booty. Those who buy the perfume will ﬁrst
sacriﬁce to the gods of the mountains, then give presents to the leader of the
aboriginals. The mountains will be opened up after this, with vines being
used to mark out the circular zones of operations.
The contract with the aboriginals will run from ten days to a month or
two. It comes into effect on the day the ‘perfume fella’ lays his hands on
some perfume. This ‘perfume fella’ is an assimilated aboriginal who is
skilled at telling which perfume is which. He points out the trees that have
perfume, or the spaces round the trees that do, following which they cut
them down and remove them. They give the aboriginals half the yield as
payment.
The perfume is mostly in the main trunk as a rule, since the energy in the
branches is too feeble for it to congeal there. Perfume that has congealed on
a living tree has matured in it during its lifetime. For perfume that has
congealed in a dead one, they will have chopped into it as it lies on the
ground (hacking into its twisted trunk and slanting branches with their axes
to make nicks that will hold the rain and dew119). The perfume needs thirty
to forty years to mature after this. In the case of trees uprooted while still
ﬂowering120 the essential liquid will have gushed out. Even if, being broken
into droplets, it cannot form sheets, the winds and rains cannot strip it
away, nor grubs or termites devour it. . . .
Even though the perfume is produced in the mountains, the aboriginals
themselves were unaware of it until people from outside wanted to buy it.
When these outsiders ﬁrst had dealings with them they recompensed the

76

Patterns

aboriginals with wine, cattle, or other commodities, according to what they
wanted. Later on, however, the opening up of the mountains has been delegated to in-migrants.121 Even when a large amount of perfume is obtained, the
aboriginals feel no regrets. Even when the mountains have been stripped so
empty that no more exists, the in-migrants cannot demand a price for this from
the outside merchants.
Thus the aborigines pass their lives in the midst of this perfume and it
provides them with their food and drink. It can be calculated that their
harvests of rice grown by slash-and-burn methods, and of beans grown in
the ashes in ﬁelds they have cleared by ﬁre, are not enough to ﬁll the stomachs of their wives and children. So long as perfume is available, most of
their daily needs can be met by relying on it. It is Heaven’s means of
providing for the aboriginals.
The familiar tale of faraway markets creating pressures on environments of
which the consumers know nothing. The tentacles of Chinese commerce were
extraordinarily far-reaching. We should also note the seriousness of the preoccupation of late-imperial Chinese scholars like Qu with natural history and
environmental issues, including a sensitivity to the inequity of the extinction
of aboriginal assets without compensation.
The Cantonese attitude toward trees in late-imperial times was complex and
to some extent distinctive. The colorful follies of folk religion were interwoven
with sharp-eyed observations of nature, and with the scholarly pseudosciences of the Book of Changes and the ﬁve-phase theory of matter. Calculating economic exploitation was counterbalanced by aesthetic delight in
particular trees. Destruction was complemented by a passionate arboriculture
and the loving restoration of damaged stands. The ﬁrst page from the section
on trees in the New Comments conveys something of the Far-South ﬂavor of
realism mixed with fantasy:122
In the Luofu mountains east of Canton there were once, in times past, the
pines of the Seven Stars standing below the altar to the Seven Stars of the
Northern Dipper.123 They were extraordinarily uncanny, and since that time
have changed into swordsmen and followed the Daoist master Concealed
Light Zou to the Court, where they have had an audience with the emperor
in the Hall of Immortals of Crystallized Substance. They have been again
transformed, now into seven Daoist masters, and come and go to and from
the world under the mountains.
Loving care was bestowed by the government on trees thought of as special:
The Plum Tree Ranges between Jiangxi and Guangdong have numerous
pines, the largest of which measure more than ten spans around, with

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

77

branches of immense length that intertwine like vines or convolvulus, many
of them hanging upside down and snapped. Their needles are a greenish
black and from the distance resemble clouds dark with rain.
Several hundred of them ﬂank the road as it winds back and forth.124 Most
of them were planted by Zhang Qujiang but have suffered from the attacks
of axes. Fires have also entered into their tubes125 so that the seasonal ﬂow of
nutrients has been interrupted, and they look like the withered pines
described in poems.
Some time ago the policy was proposed that the authorities should make
a register of the numbers of the trees and record their girths. Subordinate
government personnel complied with this for the red ﬂowering plums by
going on tours of inspection. Every month they made an investigation. Trees
that had been injured were without fail restored. This was done for all the
old plum trees, so they will be able to survive a further few hundred years
without rotting. This was really an extraordinarily admirable policy. Alas!
People have been aware of the plum trees in the Plum Tree Ranges but not
of the pines!
Around 1700, there was still relatively little deforestation. The entry in the New
Comments on Cunninghamia, the ‘Chinese ﬁr’ that was the commonest
commercial plantation species, observes that:126
There is not much Cunninghamia in Guangdong. The saplings come mostly
from the province of Jiangxi, and the majority of those buying them are
landowners who have clear-cut their plantations and are planting replacements. They therefore take as many to plant as equals the number of
stumps. Guangdong and Guangxi have plenty of trees for timber. Those who
use Cunninghamia are only forty per cent. For this reason this species is not
often planted.127
The stripping of the hills mostly took place at the end of the late-imperial
period. Robert Marks, a specialist in the environmental history of the Far
South, concludes that:128
The accumulated evidence . . . indicates the progressive deforestation of
Lingnan [the Far South] in the eighteenth century, coincident with peaks
in the population and cultivated land area surpassing previous peaks in
the Song and Ming, and with ofﬁcial state policy after 1740 encouraging
the clearance of the hill country and the periodic—if not annual—burning
of grass off the hills. If, as Ling Daxie has estimated, forests in 1700 had
covered about half of the land area of Lingnan, decreasing to 5–10 percent
by 1937, then most of that deforestation . . . occurred during the eighteenth
century.

78

Patterns

Exceptionally, cereal cultivation might be exchanged for the growing of trees,
which could sometimes give higher returns. Here is a fragment from the entry
on lichees and long'ans from New Comments on Guangdong:129
The diked banks inside the stone-walled polders of Canton are all planted
with lichees and long'ans. In some cases people have abandoned their riceﬁelds in order to plant these trees. . . . They use mud deposited as sediment to
construct mounds about two feet in height so that the ﬂoodwater cannot
reach the trees. They make coverings for them of cut grass so that they are
not touched by the ﬁerce sun. If they want to make the water rise inside the
trunk of a long'an they bind it with rice-stalks. If they want the fruits to be
large and numerous, they bury salt beside it. If grubs appear they prick the
tree with iron wires dipped in a drug. If this is not done, the tree will
become totally worm-eaten.
In contrast to the subtle but passive indigenous knowledge used to ﬁnd
perfume in the eaglewood forests, the cultivation of trees could be a form of
premodern high-tech.

The northwestern margins
We have seen that the original core of classical Chinese culture was hostile to
forests, and saw their removal as the precondition for the creation of a civilized
world. The major later ideological exception to this attitude was Buddhism,
which was imported into China from India early in the ﬁrst millennium ce,
and soon acquired extensive inﬂuence. Archaic Indian beliefs embodied a
deeper respect for trees and forests than their Chinese counterparts,130 even if,
besides being a place of saintly hermitage and royal exile, the forest was also
regarded as the refuge of robbers, and the spread of civilization often seen as
linked to deforestation,131 as it was in early China. Buddhism probably brought
something of the positive side of Indian sentiment along with it.
The importance of Buddhist institutions in countering the pressures typically at work on forests may be illustrated from the section on woods in the
1909 gazetteer for Dan'ger subprefecture132 in Xining prefecture in Gansu, near
the headwaters of the Huang River.133 This was basically a pastoral region, on
the edge of ethnic Chinese settlement, and was probably never heavily
forested, at least in late-imperial times.
The gazetteer section translated here makes plain other aspects of these
northwestern margins. These are the sparse distribution of the woods, their
restricted extent, the small size of most trees, and the degree to which the

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

79

preservation of small patches of forests depended on special factors such as
public ownership, ownership by monasteries, or the sacred nature of the
groves. Silviculturalists experienced constant difﬁculty in protecting growing
trees from theft, timber being an ever more valuable property commercially.
The Domesday-Book-style accounting in this section—the listing of woods
given here being presented as complete, though it is unlikely to have been—is
a reminder of how acutely the need for wood was experienced by the lateimperial economy.134 As of 1890, the meager reserves of timber other than
willow, as listed below, had to meet the needs of a subprefectural population
of at least 16,000 Han Chinese people, in addition to a number of Tibetans and
Mongols.135 The key phrases have been italicized:136
Xiangher wood . . . On the mountain slopes south of the Huang River,
from the base to the summit. It occupies about 40 mou. The trees range
from 10 to over 20 feet in height, with trunk diameters of from 5 to 6 inches
up to 8 to 9 inches.137 These are the largest of the forest trees in the mountain passes, and consist solely of birches. Little of the material is suitable for
making carts or barrows.
On the slopes to the east there is another wood, of somewhat more than
10 mou. Although the trees here are not large, they are dense and of an equal
height. It is apparent how well they ﬂourish when the right methods are
used to cultivate and protect them. Both of these woods are the public collective property of the Xiangher village, and are cut and sold by the people of
the community to provide for public purposes. Private persons are not
permitted to take trees from them.
Ahadiu wood . . . In the curve of the mountains south of Ahadiu village.
From the bottom of the mountain to the watershed it occupies more than
200 mou. The trees are over 10 feet tall, with trunk diameters from 1 to 2
inches up to 4 to 5 inches, with a sparse and not very ﬂourishing distribution. There are both birches and poplars. To the southeast . . . there is
another wood of perhaps 40 mou, rather more thickly set but with trees of
no great height. Both of these woods are owned by farming families in the
neighborhood; but even by making use of the strength of several households to
safeguard their growth, it has not proved possible to stop throngs of thieves
coming in repeatedly. In the area near the south mountain the ground is
entirely sprouts and stumps on account of the difﬁculty of protecting it, and
woods here are particularly few in number.
Qubutan grove . . . Occupies rather more than 10 mou. The wood is very
densely set, and the trees likewise fairly large. . . . There is a small temple in
the middle. The elders of Qubutan village revere this grove as being of sacred

80

Patterns

trees, and do not dare to collect the branches and twigs. Tradition has it that
anyone felling a tree will meet with a supernatural calamity. They therefore
keep a respectful watch over it. . . .
Lamole wood . . . Occupies about 200 mou. Of intermingling pines and
birches. Although there are some large trees, it is not very dense. This wood
is the property of the Buddhist monks of the Dongke Temple, and they have
forbidden thieving and unauthorized felling. For this reason it spreads about
in luxuriant growth. . . .
Yaoshui Gorge grove On the shaded slope of the Yaoshui Gorge mountains. . . . Discontinuous and not very dense. In recent years the temple
monks have begun to propose that it be protected, this being because the
timber can be encompassed in the span of one’s hands and there are no
large pieces. The trees are birch, and it will still be several decades before
there is usable timber from a mature stand.
Dongke Temple South Mountain Wood Covers about 200 mou. Pines and
birches. Numerous large trees, especially pines. Diameters run up to more
than 2 feet, with not a single horizontally growing branch broken off from
bottom to top. For this reason they are twisted and swollen, coarse and
knotted everywhere, so that the timber is, on the contrary, not of good
quality. The monks consider that trees before a temple are a means of showing
reverence for the Buddha, and for this reason since the time the temple was
built until the present, they have never cut one down. The luxuriance of the
growth is exceptional. Tibetan monks like cultivating woods, and since this
one is near the temple, it is particularly easy for them to cultivate it.
Zhacang Temple grove . . . Rather more than a thousand pines, both large
and small, and birch trees all told. Gathering fallen branches and felling is
likewise forbidden. The property of the Buddhist monks of the Zhacang
Temple. Nearby to the southwest . . . are several tens of small cypresses with
no one to tend them, which makes it hard to hope that they will grow into a
mature wood.
Willows on the Molin River Spontaneously growing trees are very
numerous in the ﬂood plain of the Huang River and along its banks. Once
those near the watermills were protected by the people there they have been able
to form a mature wood. They are however only from 8 to 9 feet in height up
to a little over 10 feet. The branches and twigs are luxuriant, affording a
green shade that covers the ground. . . . They are not much use for timber.
Branches are at times gathered from them and woven into large baskets to
be ﬁlled with stones [as gabions] to serve as defense against ﬂoods. . . .

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

81

Within the subprefecture over a hundred mou of land in all are occupied by
watermills, and trees of this sort are owned by the proprietors of the watermills in various places.
Planted willows These are either along the dikes or the sides of the roads,
or else beside ﬁelds and gardens. . . . There are plantings every year. The total
of old and new, large and small, is at a casual estimate 400,000 to 500,000
trees. About thirty per cent of newly planted trees will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to stay
alive; and approximately a further ﬁfty per cent which have achieved a
reduced span of life will not attain a condition in which they are ﬁt for use
as timber. Large trees with trunks whose diameters range from 5 to 6 inches
up to a foot and some inches will only amount to twenty per cent. The
general explanation for this state of affairs is that it is necessary for the trees
planted by well-to-do families to wait until they have grown large before
they are ﬁt to be timber. Those that do not wait to grow large but are cut down
and sold to be beams for houses can fetch a mere two or three tenths of an ounce
of silver for each one. This has even so caused large trees to be ever fewer in
number. Although replacements are planted year after year, it is hard to have
any hope that there will be woods of a ﬂourishing appearance. These trees
all belong to the common people.
Ofﬁcially owned woods . . . The subprefect of Dan'ger . . . contributed funds
in 1907 for these to be planted. The two locations concerned have more than
10,000 trees altogether, and they are already emerging as saplings. If it
desired, however, that they stay alive and mature, there will have to be supplementary planting. There were no ofﬁcial trees in Dan'ger in times past; these
have only started in the present day. . . . If in the future these ofﬁcial trees are
not safeguarded in a variety of ways . . . they will gradually become fewer until
ﬁnally none are left.
Since the Qing-dynasty mou, the unit in which areas were recorded, was 0.067
of a hectare, there were thus on the face of it about 47 hectares of forest, not
all of them accessible for use, plus half a million willow trees, some pines, and
some saplings. Not counting the trees planted around farmers’ ﬁelds, which
were not included, this was equivalent to about 0.003 of a hectare of trees, basically pines and birches, plus 31 willows, per person. As the area was said to be
self-sufﬁcient in timber, the data is therefore likely to be incomplete.
It would seem that the ﬁnancial attraction of cashing in the market value of
immature trees, especially when the risk of losing everything through theft,
and the high cost of protection, were taken into account, was hastening the
disappearance of mature stands of cultivated trees. And Dan'ger had almost no
old-growth forests.

82

Patterns

Changing economic pressures were probably at work in creating this situation. The Dan'ger mercantile economy was thought of as fairly conservative in
the late nineteenth century, but putting money with merchants on deposit at
interest was by this date a standard practice.138 The time-discount rate may
thus have risen compared to earlier times, exponentially increasing the
amount that timber cashed in at the present moment was worth relative to the
same timber left standing at any given point in the future. It needs to be
emphasized that this, like the illustrative calculations that follow, are hypothetical and have the status of an idea still awaiting speciﬁc validation (or
disproof) from documentary sources.
In rough terms, the tree-grower would have done something like the
following calculation each year for each tree:
What is the likely proportionate increase g in the present value of this tree
($T) from natural growth over this year, minus the cost $P of caring for it
and protecting it against theft effectively for this period? What is the
proportion s by which I have to then reduce this amount to allow for probable survival from ﬁres and other hazards over the coming year? Is not
cutting it down going to yield me more by the end of the year than cutting
it right now (even if it is a little smaller in size and so lower in value than it
would be next year), selling it for $T, and investing the proceeds at an
annual proportionate interest of i per annum during the forthcoming year,
discounted by the probability b that the bank will not go bankrupt during
this time?
Calculation shows that if it is arbitrarily assumed for illustrative purposes that
T = $50, g = 1.2, P = $5, i = 1.1, s = 0.95, and b = 0.95 the two courses both yield
the same small proﬁt. (Because [(50 x 1.2) – 5] ǂ 0.95 = (50 ǂ 1.1) ǂ 0.95 =
52.25.) Even slight changes in the relationships between the rates g, i, s, and b
will tend to alter the best course of action. (Just dropping s to 0.9, for example,
makes keeping the tree for another year a loss-making proposition.) Different
species of tree also vary greatly in the time it takes them to come to maturity.
The example is of course unrealistic in several ways, most obviously because
it ignores possible economies of scale, but it lays bare the mechanism at work.
Once a reasonably reliable ﬁnancial market was in place, when a cultivated or
protected tree was felled was basically determined by when its approximately
logistic rate of physical growth was overtaken by the intrinsically exponential
rate of growth of a sum of money invested at compound interest.139 In the
limiting case, when growth has stopped entirely, so that g = 1.0, retaining the
tree for a further year reduces the return to (50 – 5) ǂ 0.95 = 42.75. Another
oversimpliﬁcation is that the foregoing ignores what could be done with the $5

83

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

Figure 1. Modeled revenue from cutting and selling a tree, with protection costs,
and the option of investing proceeds at interest.

Net sales revenue (price minus accumulated protection costs)
if cut in a given year or if cut
in previous year and proceeds invested

100

100
The accumulation of
protection costs starts
to reduce net revenue

80

80

36.842, 62.456, 62.456
60

Crossover
point

60

40

40

20

20

0

0
Net sales revenue
0

10

20

Investment option
30

40

50

Years of growth of tree
Logistic curve: a =maximum = 100, b = 1,000,000, c = 0.4 (see p. 473 n. 25); tree matures at 50 years; rate
of interest per annum, 10 per cent; protection costs per annum, 2 per cent of current market value.

for P, protection services, that are released if the tree is sold at once. Invested
at i, with the same value for b, it would yield a further net income of $0.475.
Under this scenario cutting down at once would be the better option. Financial institutions thus have a demonstrable impact on the environment. In the
hypothetical but plausible scenario suggested here they could have created a
cash-in imperative pressing on those growing trees.
Figure 1 shows the pattern that emerges when the income from cutting and
selling a tree in a given year, after the accumulated costs of protection have
been deducted, is contrasted with the income resulting from cutting and
selling it the previous year and investing the proceeds (including the protection saved). The age of a tree at maturity has been arbitrarily set at 50 years,
its growth pattern over time is represented by a simple logistic curve with an

84

Patterns

asymptote of 100, the market value has been taken as determined by the age
of the tree up to maturity, the protection cost per year has been set at two per
cent of the market value in a given year, and the interest rate at ten per cent
per year. The risks of the loss of the tree and the failure of the bank are not
included. The two points that need to be noted are how the costs of protection virtually compel the sale of a tree before it is fully mature, and how
the availability of the investment option lowers the optimal age for cutting
and sale.

The three phases
This chapter may be seen, in an abstract sense, as having in a sketchy and
approximate fashion combined for the history of forests and woods the pattern
through time of the ‘economics’ column of Table 1 with space–time weightings
taken from Map 2. This last, it will be recalled, suggested from ﬁgure-andground analysis of the retreat of the elephants that over the two-and-a-half
thousand years from the ancient down to the late-imperial period there was a
general spread of premodern development from the north to the south of
China Proper, with a further southwestward shift near the end. In other words,
where elephants had retreated, intensive farming had usually arrived.
Equally importantly, some documentation has now been provided in
support of this reconstruction. It is patchy because the sources are patchy, and
the historian has somehow to combine the few glimpses of detail available into
a coherent imagined panorama. The items cited, often at some length, are not
an anthology drawn from a much wider reserve of materials, but a substantial
proportion of what can at present be identiﬁed as relevant.
The history of forests, trees, and wood provides crucial tracers for past
economic growth and its environmental impact. In most places trees had to be
cut down to make space for ﬁelds. Timber was the main material used to make
houses, means of transport like boats and carts, and machinery. Logs were the
most important premodern source of fuel for cooking, heating, and industrial
processing. Forests provided ecological services such as protection against
erosion, and a buffer against hard times in the form of game and birds to hunt,
and a supply of wild foods. They also of course harbored dangerous animals
and pests like the mosquitoes that were the vectors for malaria.
A broad pattern of three phases emerges, reinforced if we also anticipate
by implicitly incorporating the ﬁndings of the later chapter on Jiaxing in
the lower Yangzi delta. The ﬁrst phase of extensive and enduring human
impact on the forests began in the north during the second half of the ﬁrst

The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species

85

millennium bce. An early feature was the effort by governments to conserve
and sometimes monopolize scarce or diminishing forest resources. There later
developed a trade in wood that at times covered many hundreds of kilometers
in distance, and, toward the end in the more economically developed areas, an
increasing de facto privatization (mostly for nonforest uses) of what had once
been woodlands open to some measure of public exploitation. By the early
centuries of the ﬁrst millennium ce the area affected had expanded to take in
parts of Sichuan in the west and of the lower and central Yangzi valley.
The second phase was associated with the medieval economic revolution of
about a thousand years ago. It had its most visible impact in the lower Yangzi
valley and parts of the west. In this phase serious shortages or even local disappearances of wood are ﬁrst reported, though with markedly uneven spatial
distribution. It was characterized by the onset of bitter quarrels between
communities over the use of forests where these had become scarce, and also
by the ﬁrst efforts to replant large stands of trees.
The third phase started in the seventeenth century but did not become
clearly established until the eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries. Only
during this period did the shortage of timber for fuel and construction
become severe in many areas, including, toward its end, the Far South. Even
remote regions were affected, with only a handful of exceptions such as
Zunhua, in the far northeast corner of China Proper, which is studied in detail
in a later chapter. Communities in economically marginal areas, sometimes of
non-Han origin, organized themselves to try to protect remaining reserves as
formally constituted communal property. The theft of wood became a widely
prevalent scourge, which inhibited production by small producers with inadequate means to defend themselves; and market pressures probably tended to
compel not only a concentration on cultivating quick-growing species but also
sales of relatively immature trees as soon as a proﬁt could be taken. A handful
of large commercial timber operations appeared in the remaining uncut oldgrowth forests, with organizational features that resembled those of late preindustrial capitalism in the West.
The basic conclusion is that China’s general forest crisis is only about three
hundred years old, even if in a few areas, such as the lower Yangzi valley, its
roots are considerably deeper in time.
Before the lens zooms in to look at selected areas in Particularities, the next
task is to determine what it was that ﬁrst set this multimillennial process of
premodern development into motion, and then kept it going. In other words,
having established an outline of the kinematics—the motions without the
causes—it is now necessary to consider the dynamics—the motions with the
causes.

5
War and the Logic of Short-term
Advantage
There is a problem. The three previous chapters have recounted a story that
started after the process of Chinese-style premodern economic development
was already under way. What was it, though, that set this process in motion in
the ﬁrst place? Or, at least, accelerated it dramatically compared to what had
been happening during the ﬁve or six thousand years immediately following
the ending of the last ice age around ten thousand years ago?
The truthful answer is that, currently, we don’t know. Broad perspectives are
easier to survey here than detailed historical realities. For these latter, we have
to push back too far too often from the oldest well-established facts into the
shadowy domain of the ‘must have been’. Even so, there is a simple and
coherent hypothesis that seems to pull the fragments of our knowledge
together into a structured intellectual ﬁeld. This is that the late-neolithic and
early bronze-age acceleration in the process of development was driven by a
competitive struggle with two related aspects. The ﬁrst of these aspects was a
struggle for increasingly scarce resources between rival groups. The second,
implicit in the ﬁrst, was a competition between warring social and cultural
patterns to survive and to achieve supremacy.1 Particular patterns were
embodied for a time in various peoples and—the crucial novelty—polities,
which conferred superior competitive capacity. The initial transformations of
the natural environment chronicled in earlier chapters were, in the last
analysis, the by-products of the demands of this struggle. The patterns of
action created by the most effective short-term exploiters of human and
natural resources won. What might have been more viable long-term patterns
counted for little or nothing faced with short-term power, just as, in chess,
brilliant tactics can make a nonsense of the most deeply conceived strategy.

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

87

This analysis ﬁts in perfectly with—though it was not originally inspired by—
Jean Baechler’s conclusion about what he terms “the neolithic mutation” that
“war is the unique motor of evolution.”2
It is important at this point to set aside any simple notion of ‘progress’. Early
‘development’ was probably not welcomed by most of those undergoing it.
Farming cereals in temperate-zone conditions—though possibly not some
early tropical forms of multicrop horticulture3—was unattractive for a long
time to many farmers. The work was backbreakingly hard. Those who did it
were exposed to the extraction of rents and taxes, to conscription for wars and
public works, and to the raids of human predators from outside. Farming
provided a less varied and healthy diet than hunting and gathering.4 The
increased density of population made possible the so-called ‘crowd diseases’
that had hardly existed before.5 Domesticating animals allowed zoonoses
(animal diseases) to transfer themselves to human beings as new and often
deadly infections.6 Husbandry, overall, offered a less interesting, sensually rich,
and challenging life than the mobile world that had preceded it. And, as
Charles Maisels has pointed out, “social . . . stratiﬁcation is about the majority’s
loss of control over the resources that sustain life.”7 Extensive evidence, some of
which will be quoted later in this chapter, shows how hard the Chinese ruling
class had to exert itself in early times to prevent its farmers from moving back
to hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering—the original occupations of humanity.
As centuries, then millennia, passed, the areas open for retreat dwindled,
and farming culture became ingrained and habitual. The assumption of its
‘superiority’ has likewise become ingrained in us, its modern inheritors. This
is the assumption that we have now to question. Superior it certainly was in
most cases as the mode of production at the base of a new competitive
complex—the militarized urban–agrarian state. But in terms of the quality of
life for the general run of the population at the time of its introduction, as
opposed to the elite? It seems doubtful. It must be remembered: ﬁelds end
freedom. Whatever the astonishing subsequent achievements of civilization, it
had a little recognized price: humanity itself became one of its own domesticated species. We enslaved ourselves to conquer.
The central question we confront is not the much-discussed origins of the
‘state’, the details of which are still too obscure.8 It is, rather—to repeat—why,
once political units with most of the characteristics of rudimentary states had
begun to emerge in the area that was to become ‘China’, this triggered a longlasting process of ‘development’ that soon radically altered the surrounding
natural world. The two questions are of course to some extent interrelated.
Thus a recent multi-author survey of aspects of state formation in various
parts of the globe focuses on a number of topics that are also touched on in

88

Patterns

this chapter.9 A selective list of these overlaps is interesting: (1) Intensiﬁed military conﬂict and competition between previously relatively peaceful political
units;10 (2) intensiﬁed economic production as part of this interstate competition;11 (3) increased internal discipline and subordination linked with the
needs of competitive warfare;12 (4) increased interaction, often violent,
between sedentary and more mobile populations;13 (5) the displacement or
subjection of outside ethnic groups;14 (6) a shift from minimal internal social
violence to a much higher level;15 (7) the imposition of tribute and laborservices;16 (8) the inculcation of the belief that the head of the polity, who
could range from a ‘chief ’ to a monarch, played a crucial ritual role in ensuring
the general prosperity;17 (9) the mobilization of religious authority to organize
political and economic activities;18 (10) the building of massive defensive structures;19 (11) advances in bronze metallurgy, especially for weapons;20 and (12)
the development of, or increased use of, writing as a means whereby political
and ideological authority could transcend the limitations of space and time for
communications, recording, bureaucracy, the preservation of orthodoxy, and
public display.21 There was no single pattern, but a loosely related family of
somewhat similar patterns, differentiated by effects due to the environment, to
inherited social structures and beliefs, and—very noticeably in the Chinese
case—to scale.22
Similar echoes can be heard in the general analytical political history developed by Baechler.23 War, an act of violence between polities, was born about
ten thousand years ago.24 It may originally have been motivated by a quest for
glory and booty; but once born, affected societies most consistently through
their fear of being attacked by others.25 Baechler argues that “the intensiﬁcation
of production is a consequence of war rather than its cause.”26 “Once war has
been invented, it exerts a powerful pressure for technical innovation.”27 War
is a crucial force for the development of a uniﬁed, pyramidal—that is,
stratiﬁed—society.28 A permanent concentration of power also tends to
require that a state rule over ethnic outsiders as well as its own people.29
Competition in war imposes efﬁciency, and this leads to a single dominant
leader.30 The need for additional resources impels an autocratic ruler to be
forever expanding his empire.31
Other comments suggest that the Chinese experience was to some extent part
of a broader pattern. Technical progress in the procurement of food reduces the
proportion of the land surface that is used for making a living: more than a third
is typically exploited for hunting–gathering; perhaps a tenth for extensive
farming; and maybe one hundredth for irrigated agriculture.32 Emigration is
only a viable means of escape from unwanted domination so long as there is
usable vacant territory not too far away.33 ‘Tribalization’ of the original human

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

89

‘bands’ is, correspondingly, in part a response to population saturation.34
While substantial kin-groups still underpin tribal polities, and, though less
strongly, states governed by monarchs and aristocrats, they are later almost obliterated by an imperial structure ruling through a bureaucratic apparatus.35
Religion alters in its focus in the Neolithic. Since farming is a chancy business, religion now tries to relieve the resultant anxiety.36 Since the prevalence
of war heightens the danger of being killed or enslaved, fear of these fates
strengthens the desire for divine protection.37 Another perspective is offered by
the duality of the new warrior’s psychology: in his dealings with his equals he
is controlled, even courteous; confronting his enemies in the world outside his
polity, he can slaughter, rape, pillage, destroy, and profane with self-satisﬁed
impunity. In the war-oriented society, ‘masculine’ values likewise relegate
‘feminine’ values to a secondary position.38
How far China was distinctive in late-neolithic and early bronze-age times
must be measured against these rough-and-ready benchmarks.

Effective warfare
The cores of the earliest Chinese civilization in the late Neolithic about four
thousand years ago were local states based primarily on settled cereal farming,
ceramic vessels to store grain safely, walled cities to guard granaries and populations,39 stone and wood and horn tools, and with bronze metallurgy for
weapons and, before long, religious ritual vessels. Their societies were divided
into distinct classes, controlled by severe social discipline, and using writing
derived from pictographs for recording such information as the ownership and
purpose of ritual vessels, the verdict of oracles, major gifts from superiors, and
other matters. This complex gave these ﬁrst archaic states a real if precarious
superiority in warfare over the less civilized or uncivilized, but otherwise rather
similar, tribes that surrounded them or lived interspersed among them.40
The majority of these tribes also practised agriculture. Both groups had
domesticated animals: notably dogs, sheep, pigs, cows in the north, and water
buffalo mainly but not only in the south. The horse appeared some time probably in the early second millenium bce, for pulling chariots, not yet for riding,
and so belonged for the moment mainly (but not exclusively) to the civilized
domain. Divination based on the shoulder blades of large animals, or the
undershells of turtles, and interpreting the cracks that appeared when they
were pierced with a heated instrument, was found from Shandong (in the
Northeast) to Gansu (in the Northwest), and from Inner Mongolia to Anhui
(in the East). The technique was most reﬁned along the east coast.41 There was

90

Patterns

thus no single key factor that emerged in one privileged place. What was new
was a particular combination of political, social, economic, and ideological
elements that, together, conferred a competitive military advantage.
Let us anchor these comments in some evidence. The last ode in the Scripture of Songs42 describes the campaign led by Wu Ding of the Shang-Yin
dynasty some time around 1200 bce 43 against the ‘Tiger Quarter’, most of
which probably lay south of the central stretch of the Yangzi River. The text as
we now have it probably comes from at least some hundreds of years later,
after the fall of the Shang-Yin. It may well have been altered to accord with the
values of the Zhou dynasty that followed, and should not be assumed to be a
fully accurate reﬂection of the Shang period. Nonetheless, its emphasis on
farming, discipline, and ﬁghting seems authentic:
Swift were the blows of King Wu Ding of Yin
In his punitive onslaught on Jing and on Chu,
Thrusting deep past the obstacles these lands opposed to him,
Till the warrior cohorts of Jing were diminished
And their settlement-strongholds likewise reduced.
The descendant of Tang — this was his doing!
Lands of Jing and of Chu, you were annexed,
So that you dwelt in our state’s southern region,
In times now long past by King Tang the Achiever.
From the Di folk and Qiang, who both live to the west,
None dared not come — to offer their presents,
None dared not come — to submit to the emperor!
So it was said, “Our Shang lives forever!”
Heaven commanded the numerous princes
To continue Yu’s work, establish their capitals,
And inform the king yearly of what had been happening:
“Spare us disgrace, and punishment’s misery!
In both sowing and reaping we have no wise been indolent!”
Heaven told those in charge to control their inferiors,
So subordinate folk respected strict discipline,
Free of arrogance, also restrained and obedient,
Not daring be lazy, nor waste their time wilfully.
It also instructed subordinate states
That their enfeoffment was good fortune’s basis.
The City of Shang has a well-ordered pattern,
The summit supreme of the world’s four directions.

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

91

Awe-inspiring in fame, it rises resplendent,
Its magical inﬂuence cleansed and immaculate.
Fighting, farming, cities, discipline. Also the imperial mystique of divine favor.
Most of the new complex is explicitly exalted in these lines. Ordinary people
had therefore to be held to agriculture by coercion and persuasion. Otherwise
rulers and their armies went unfed.
The Zhou tribe ﬁrst appeared in recorded history during Wu Ding’s reign
just mentioned. They founded a state in western Shaanxi, northwest of the
Shang domain. Over the next two hundred years they had a varying relationship of conﬂict and cooperation with the Shang, but ended by becoming their
allies on a basis of near-equality. Finally, near the end of the ﬁrst millennium
bce, they combined with the somewhat less civilized tribes to their west—but
including the Shu from Sichuan, masters of bronze-working—and defeated
the Shang army at the battle of Muye, most probably in 1041 bce. Their
triumph was due partly to these alliances, partly to the charismatic leadership
of King Wu and the favorable omens with which he was blessed as the
campaign opened, and partly—probably—to the use of four-horse chariots
against the Shang’s two-horse vehicles.
For the early Zhou, too, success in war was, ultimately, everything. When the
founder of their dynasty, King Wen, had annihilated the city–state of Chong on
the south side of the middle Wei valley (in the Northwest), he built a new capital
nearby at Feng. The closing stanzas of an ode44 celebrate the early Zhou mastery
of siegecraft that made possible this destruction of a rival. The walls whose
scaling and breach is described here were probably built of rammed earth.
To King Wen of Zhou, God conveyed his conception:
“Consult with the regions now your confederates.
Link with brothers and cousins, kin of one generation.
With curved hooks for grappling attached to your ladders,
With wheeled towers and rams for approaching and battering,
Smash the ramparts of Chong with righteous attack!”
The wheeled towers advanced, and rams, steady and serried.
Chong’s walls rose above, unperturbed and immense.
— Their seized chiefs came in lines, to be put to the question,
And in calm, awesome, fashion we axed off their heads.
These we gave God, and the vanquished land’s spirits,
Spoke respects to the dead, to their shades offered gifts.
In the four-quartered world, none showed him insolence.
His wheeled towers and rams were as dense-packed as thickets.

92

Patterns

Though Chong’s walls were massive, soaring uplifted,
He chastised them in battle, and smashed his way in,
Snapped their line of descent, and snuffed out their existence,
So that nobody, anywhere, showed opposition.
Whatever civilization was, or was to become, its bedrock was—and remains—
superior skill in human butchery.

The matrix of power
The new factor was organization. Both of bodies and of minds. By the late
Neolithic, the components that were soon to be combined in the emerging
concentrations of power, skills, resources, and articulated action that can only
reasonably be deﬁned as ‘states’ were present in many places across the subcontinent we today call ‘China’. Cereal farming of rice could be found as easily
along the southern shore of Hangzhou Bay (in the East) as that of millet in the
central valley of the Yellow River (in the Northwest and Northeast). Fired
earthenware was similarly widespread, as were walled settlements. Sophisticated bronze-casting could be found not just in the traditional northern heartland of early Chinese culture, but in Sichuan in the West and the Gan river
valley in Jiangxi to the south. There is an underlying afﬁnity between objects
from these centers, and certain shared motifs, that suggest a common origin,
but local differences in style and emotional tonality can be striking. Examples
are the eerily elongated more-than-life-size bronze human ﬁgure and masks
from Sanxingdui in Guanghan in Sichuan. They are from the Shang period but
have no known Shang counterparts.45 What seem to be meaningful incised
marks, pictographs or even, possibly, traces of proto-scripts can likewise be
found long before the mid second millennium along the east coast and in what
is today Qinghai in the Northwest, as well as the Shang heartland.46 What is
relevant is how these components, and the others, were put together.
Everything interlocked. Settled farming supported denser concentrations
of population than did hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering. This provided the
extra manpower and supplies needed for larger armies and more numerous
temporary conscripts for public works, whether rammed-earth walls or public
buildings. The colossal scale of preimperial warfare in China, especially during
the Warring States period from the ﬁfth to the third centuries bce at its end,
is well known, but it is worth recalling that it went back further. The Shang
were constantly ﬁghting other states and peoples, mobilizing thousands to
some tens of thousands of troops on each occasion for the purpose. Since the

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

93

population of the Shang at the start of the dynasty has been estimated to have
been between 4 and 4.5 million,47 this would not have been an impossible operation. The Zhou army that defeated the Shang towards the end of the second
millennium bce had close to 50,000 soldiers. By the Springs and Autumns
period, the forces raised by the separate individual states were of the same
order of magnitude; and by the time of the Warring States armies are
frequently mentioned as having exceeded 100,000, sometimes several-fold.
There were over 480 recorded wars in the 242 years of the Springs and
Autumns period, and 590 in the 248 years of the Warring States period which
followed.48 These ﬁgures for the size of armies, huge by the standards of the
archaic world, have understandably raised skepticism, but references in the
sources are quite numerous and broadly internally consistent.
A large section of the ten-meter-high defensive wall built about 1600 bce
around what is now Zhengzhou (in the Northeast) is still standing, and it is
estimated that its total length was about 7 kilometers. The average width at the
base was about 20 meters, and at the top about 5 meters.49 If we (arbitrarily)
assume that the inward extension of the base clear of the top was twice as great
on the inside as on the enemy side, this gives in round ﬁgures a volume of
875,000 cubic meters. Without a good idea of the efﬁciency of Shang tools it is
hard to estimate the workforce that would have been needed for digging up the
raw material, transporting it to the site, lifting it, and ramming it, besides
constructing the temporary wooden shuttering to hold the earth in place while
it was pounded, and other lesser tasks. If it took 8 men a day to handle a cubic
meter of ﬁnished rammed earth through all these stages, then it would have
needed 3,500 men working 200 days a year for 10 years to complete it.
Increased military power made possible tribute and taxes, and obligatory
services. All of these intensiﬁed the concentration of ﬁnancial, material, and
technical resources. One result was increased specialization among artisans.
Certain Shang clans or kin-groups seem to have focused on particular crafts.50
Shang cities supported workshops that were skilled not only in casting bronze
weapons and ritual bronze vessels, with their spectacular animal patterns, but
also in other, more mundane, techniques. Bone was made into arrowheads,
hairpins, awls, needles, knives, forks, ﬁshhooks, and even incised with tables
showing the sixty-unit cycle composed of paired units taken from the ten
‘trunks’ and twelve ‘branches’. These were used for recording the days. There
were also rulers for measuring lengths. Stone was shaped into the bases for
pillars, grindstones, axes, knives, pestles and mortars, chisels, spinning whorls
for yarn, and chiming musical stones. Specialist potters heated kilns to 1000°
Celsius, glazed their wares, and imprinted them with patterns cut into molds.
Textiles included hemp, Pueraria ﬁber cloth, and silks, some of them already

94

Patterns

ﬁgured and woven on looms of some complexity, probably for the royal
house itself.51
Exchange and trade have deep roots in human history. There are hints that
in China, as elsewhere, they predated civilization. One such hint is the presence of cowry shells—the produce of the South China and East China Seas,52
and later used as proto-money in China as in other parts of the world53—at a
site in Qinghai, far inland to the northwest, and dated to 2500 bce. Plus imitation cowries made of bone.54 Under the Shang, cowries were to serve as a form
of high-status quasi-money, in contrast to their low per-unit value in some
other regions. Oracle bones record kings giving quantities such as two and ﬁve
strings of these shells on special occasions to favored recipients.55 Early in the
ﬁrst millennium bce greater quantities were in circulation and they became
close to authentic money for a short time. There is, for example, a record of a
ﬁeld being valued at from seven to eight strings.56
In similar fashion, an even earlier site in He'nan (in the Northeast) from the
sixth millennium bce has yielded turquoise, at a vast distance from any
known geological source.57 Oracle bone records show that under the Shang
dynasty ox-drawn carts were used to transport supplies for the armed forces,
a logistical advantage over those without them. Some scholars think that Wang
Hai, the ﬁrst known ancestor of the Shang line, and revered as the original
tamer of wild cattle, was killed by the Youyi barbarians in north China when
transporting goods in wagons hauled by oxen.58 The critical point is that the
growing demand that early civilization created for both luxury and basic
materials accelerated the volume and value of tribute, transport, and trade over
longer and longer distances.59 Where strategic goods, like tin ore from south of
the Yangzi, were concerned, it further became necessary for the state to safeguard the routes over which they came.60
At the core of the new civilization were the cities, often like garrisons in a
far from fully subdued countryside. The creation of the city began a crucial
decoupling between the dominant, decision-making, part of the human population, now living increasingly in a built environment, and the rest of natural
world. In other words, where and when a decision was made less and less coincided with where and when its environmental impact was felt. Decisional
distance of this sort has the dimensions of space (from the point of decision to
the point of impact), time (from present to future generations), and social
rank (from decision-makers to the lower classes). Increasing it has progressively lessened the awareness of and sensitivity to the environmental effects of
their policies among rulers and their advisers. This still holds today.
The city required the invention of social and material structures to
moderate and channel the increased rate of social interactions between

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

95

different members of the population, and, in parallel, techniques and institutions for controlling a larger compact demographic unit than any known
before in human evolution.61 This interlocked with the development of the
stratiﬁed society needed for the exercise of power both more intensively and
more extensively than ever before.
The city was, and is, the epitome of most of these sorts of separation.
Donald Hughes has observed of ancient Mesopotamia that “it is as if the
barrier of city walls and the rectilinear pattern of canals had divided human
beings from wild nature and substituted an attitude of confrontation for the
earlier feeling of cooperation. . . . Literature . . . often use[s] the image of battle
to describe the new relationship with nature.”62 In his view most ancient cities
in western Eurasia also “placed too great a demand on available resources,
depleted them within their sphere, and then went as far as they could to gain
access to additional resources, until this effort also failed,” leading to their
eventual decline.63
Chinese settlements ﬁrst acquired moats in the Yangshao period
(commonly identiﬁed by its pottery painted in swirling geometric patterns) in
the penultimate stage of the Neolithic. These ditches were probably mainly for
defense against animals, since storage areas at this time could be outside the
moat. Walls followed in the Longshan period, known for its characteristic
shiny, thin-walled black ceramic wares. They were presumably for protection
against other people.64 The Record of the Rituals says of this period when the
“Great Way had already fallen into obscurity” that “inner and outer walled
cities and moats provided security; ritual behavior and public-spirited principles provided discipline. . . . Thus whatever was advantageous was put into
effect, but from this warfare came into existence.”65 Walls were of rammed earth,
sometimes multiple, and had substantial areas of nonurban land within them.
A fairly standard urban spatial pattern developed under the Shang, with graves
and workshops being just outside the defended area. Military control was
based on each central city—above all, the principal capital—being surrounded
by a network of satellite cities, and on the development of ‘secondary capitals’.66
The Scripture of Songs tells of how in Shang times Gong Liu, progenitor of
the Zhou lineage, “mounted the southern ridge, discovering there the site for
the Capital,” and how “the farmed lands for the military cantonments of the
Capital at the appropriate time spread everywhere.” Furthermore, “his armies
had three divisions, so he measured the wetlands and the uplands, and had the
land share-cultivated to provide his tax-revenue in grain.”67 Nine generations
later, Gong Tanfu, founder of the Zhou royal house, moved his capital to
Zhouyuan, or the ‘plain of Zhou’, where “a hundred walls all rose up.”68 The
driving force behind this agrarian–urban transformation was acknowledged to

96

Patterns

have been military effectiveness. As the Scripture of Songs say of Tanfu’s city:
“He raised the grand Earth-Altar whence the great armies marched forth.”69
The multiplicity of walls spoken of by the Scripture of Songs probably refers
to internal walls around palaces and urban subdivisions. The Chinese city
during the ﬁrst two millennia of its existence was, perhaps with some exceptions, a cellular structure under tight control. Only a few favored mansions of
the great opened directly onto the main thoroughfares, ordinary residences
being conﬁned within walled enclaves—the quarters—that were dead ends.
For details we have to turn to the late-preimperial work on statecraft, the
Master Guan.
It is easy to criticize such an apparently anachronistic jump forward in time,
and the professional conscience of the historian is uncomfortable with such a
procedure. Its justiﬁcation is that it lets us access, in explicit form, what
appears to be the logic of a long-term trend, and simple reactive criticism of
the attempt to do this is just that—too simple. Nonetheless, the reader has
been warned.
The Master Guan is one of the most awkward of sources to use. It is a compilation, probably consisting of a core from the third century bce with later additions. There is a measure of unity of point of view when it is considered in
relation to works from other major schools, but the different parts seem to
come from different hands, and to some degree reﬂect somewhat different
outlooks on the world.70 Despite the dangers of anachronism in using so late a
work even as a general guide to the likely underlying thrust of earlier ideas and
institutions, the kind of political world it purports to describe often seems, at
least superﬁcially, like that of the late Springs and Autumns or early Warring
States, though harshly simpliﬁed and schematic. It is impossible to determine
the extent to which the text is an attempt at a description of something that
once existed, and the extent to which it is a prescription of an ideal. There would
seem to be a mixture. Nonetheless the obsession with control is suggestive.71
The main city wall must be unbroken. The walled suburbs that surround it
must not communicate with the outside. The urban quarters must not
communicate laterally with each other. The gates to the domestic precincts
must be kept shut. The doors closed with bolts in the walls round the
mansions should be maintained in good order.
The reason for this is that if the main city wall is not unbroken, rebellious
people will start to plot. If the walled suburbs surrounding communicate
with the outside, treacherous refugees and transgressors will appear. If the
urban quarters communicate laterally with each other, there will be no end
to robbery and thieving. If the gates of the domestic precincts are not kept
shut, and the domains of the home and the world outside come into

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

97

contact, there will be no separation between males and females. If the
walls round the mansions are not kept in good repair, and the bolted doors
are not secure, those who possess goods of high quality will not be able to
safeguard them.
The sense of the city–state being a garrison city is palpable.
Urban dwellers were supposed to live under unremitting surveillance. In an
earlier section a hierarchical administrative system is detailed, based on units
of ﬁve or ten families. The Master Guan then continues:72
One must build in the separations. One must block up the hiding-places.
A single road should provide an ample width for all entering and leaving.
One should scrutinize closely the gates of the neighborhood precincts, and
pay particular attention to the control of the bolts and the storehouses by
the chiefs of the quarters. Wardens should be established at the precinct
gates to open and close them at the proper times. The precinct gate-wardens
should observe those who leave and enter, so that they can report to the
chief of their quarter. All cases of leaving or coming in at the wrong time, or
of wearing of abnormal clothing, or of family members and personal
followers disobeying moral rules, when noticed by a gate-warden, should be
reported at once.
A control system was thus in place well before the imperial age. For the
moment there is no way of saying how early. He Xiu, a commentator of the
second century ce, noted with reference to 539 bce, that73
In the spring and the summer the people went out to the ﬁelds. In the
autumn and winter they went in to defend the inner and outer cities. In the
seasons of agricultural work, the fathers and elders and chiefs of the urban
quarters would open the gates at dawn, and sit at the surveillance posts.
Those who left later than the proper time would not be allowed to leave. In
the evening, those who did not keep to their [own proper] gate-tower would
not be allowed to come back in.74
Discipline was at the heart of the new urban-agrarian life.
Looking forward for a moment, even more anachronistically, we can note in
passing that during the ﬁrst part of the imperial age that followed, locational
subdivision by status and occupation seems even to have been intensiﬁed, and
strict urban policing maintained. Life within the walls ran to a time-schedule,
including a ban on most movements around the city at night. Market areas
had a monopoly of permitted trading, and were walled and ofﬁcially
controlled during the early and middle empires up to the Tang.75 Unlike that
of medieval Europe, the air of the ancient Chinese city did not ‘make one

98

Patterns

free’.76 Ultimately the medieval economic revolution, and the spread of a
multiplicity of largely free markets, were to break these bonds, but not till the
eighth and ninth centuries, and, above all, the Song.
How was this all kept together? Let us leave our excursus into later times and
go back to the second millennium bce again. First and foremost the new
empire was an empire over the soul. A small part of this invisible dominion
was rational, focusing on the numerical subjugation of nature. The Shang
prescribed a basic unit of measure (1.7 centimeters), a musical scale, a calendar,
and presumably the number of cowries in the standard double ‘string’ (probably ten).77 For the most part, though, its pre-eminence was in the realm of the
spirits.
The inheritance of a late-neolithic substratum of belief in numinous animal
powers constituted the foundation of the religious sense of the world at this
time. Its inner nature is now hidden from us, but its existence is palpable not
only from the zoomorphic pictographs but above all from the animal motifs
that dominate Shang bronzes, their sometimes theriomorphic shapes, and the
so-called taotie masks that often adorn their sides, composites of the features
of a number of different species, and hauntingly indecipherable. The transition at the end of the second millennium bce from the Shang to the Zhou
dynasty, who did not share this concern with the animal world, started a
process whereby these bronzes slowly lost their old spiritual power, and
became little more than symbols of social rank. If they were still potent to
some degree it was because of their link with sacriﬁces to the ancestors.78 For
the environmental historian this later change prompts a profound but still
unanswerable question about the alteration of the relations of human beings
with the once circumambient animal world now being subdued and marginalized by civilization.
The Shang seem to have hierarchicalized, rationalized, and syncretized these
ancient inherited beliefs, without however acknowledging them directly—at
least in the brief oracle-bone texts that have survived, a curious and noteworthy fault line in the records. There is an unexplained gulf between the
bronze visual symbols and bone-based writing. Since people in this age of the
world believed that everything that happened was the work of a multitude of
invisible beings, the Shang ideology—reconstructed from the written
records—deﬁned these latter as ultimately ruled by a God Above or Ultimate
Ancestor, Shangdi. The spirits, God included, could be questioned about their
feelings and the future by means of divination—burning cracks in the
shoulder blades of large mammals or the undershells of turtles, or casting the
stalks of certain plants. These ever-present but invisible entities could also be
inﬂuenced by sacriﬁces of animals and human beings. But the intermediaries

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

99

stated to be qualiﬁed to do this questioning were now exclusively political.
Shang religion presented the king as a spirit in human incarnation, as allpowerful in the tangible, visible world as his ancestor God Above was in the
domain of spirits. These spirits, including the departed forebears of both
genders of the royal house, inhabited everything and moved everything—
stars, winds, rivers, mountains, plants, and dreams. They determined the
weather, the harvests, natural disasters, the outcome of battles and illnesses,
and the founding or destruction of cities. The ruler’s intermediary role had
been made indispensable.
As the chief link between God Above and the spirits on the one hand and
his human subjects on the other, the Shang king was a privileged channel of
communication, as well as the principal patron, and at times practitioner, of
divination and sacriﬁce. Sacriﬁcing was an act that implied political legitimacy: princes could only sacriﬁce in their own territories and only so long as
they possessed authority there. The emperor, or his envoys, everywhere. This
amalgam must have drawn most of its elements from the late-neolithic religion, with diviners, sorcerers, and offerers of prayers and sacriﬁces already in
existence, but ‘God Above’ was a political invention of sinister genius: a deity
who was, or became, speciﬁcally linked to the Shang without any moral
preconditions, and yet endowed with an allegedly universal suzerainty.
Royal life in second-millennium-bce China consumed hours every day in
divination. Results were repetitively rechecked almost in the manner of a
scientist duplicating an experiment. Treasure-troves of resources were
expended on sacriﬁces. At times three hundred oxen might be butchered, or a
hundred or even three hundred Qiang—western barbarians probably akin to
Tibetans, and skilled herders of sheep—sent to the shadows by beheading. Or
else by burial in a pit, or cutting in two, or burning alive, or by slicing. It is only
possible to guess at the psychological intuition that underpinned this political
behavior. Most probably it conveyed to the people the message that society was
in a state of perpetual peril from which only the vigilance, and the unique skills
and prerogatives of the ruling house, continually exercised, could save it. The
seriousness of the blood price repeatedly paid drove home into the consciousness of the subjects of the Shang how much was at stake if the demands of the
spirits were not met and their anger not assuaged. Rebellion—which of course
happened frequently—was not only presented as a sacrilege, but redeﬁned into
being a threat to the security of humankind as a whole.79
The other innovation was a command structure. In our own bureaucratized,
policed, and nannied society it is easy to forget how unnatural it has been
throughout most of the human past for adult men to give orders to other
adult men.80

100

Patterns

In the oracle-bone texts from the late second millennium bce, the graph for
‘order’ or ‘command’81 is linked to the two powers that issued the ultimate
orders: the Ultimate Ancestor or Supreme God82 in the invisible world of the
spirits, and the Emperor83 in the visible world of nature and humankind. God
gave orders for the rain to fall or not, for the winds to blow or not, and for the
lightning to ﬂash or not.84 Often the winds were his envoys who carried out his
commands.85 God it was who ordained the good or bad quality of the harvests,
the outcome of battles, and the occurrence or absence of sickness.86 The ruler
had constantly to conﬁrm through divination that what he was doing was in
compliance with God’s orders.
His own commands were characteristically given to his zhong.87 The meaning
of this term is controversial, but most probably indicates a corps of elite
warrior–administrators.88 He might also issue directives to subordinate tribal
states such as the Zhou,89 or to individuals to take some particular action.
Government ministers at times gave orders to the zhong to perform military
duties, construction, or farming, or to other ofﬁcials in what was still a relatively
undifferentiated bureaucracy.90 There was also a lower command structure
consisting of those to whom orders were given and who passed them on.91
Some farming was done under the supervision of state ofﬁcials, but may mostly
have been for ritual purposes.92 At the lowest levels of society, existing kingroups probably formed the basis of Shang political organization, through the
services and tribute they owed to the ruler.93 A later text mentions that in the
reign of Emperor Cheng at the start of the Zhou dynasty, the son of the regent,
the Duke of Zhou, was given six named kin-groups of the defeated Shang, and
one of the Duke’s brothers another seven. It speaks of the ‘main line of the clan’,
the ‘subdivided family groups’, and ‘the others of their kind’—the meaning of
this last term not being entirely clear. It may possibly point to a group of lower
status.94 Slaves were also found, an example being the captives taken in the wars
of the last of the Shang emperors against the ‘eastern barbarians’.95
Under the early Zhou, inscriptions on bronzes reveal a quasi-feudal landed
economy—which we should not assume was the whole of the rural economy—
in which the labor force was under tight discipline. Records now tell of
‘managers’, commoners, retainers, and slaves being given to nobles by the ruler
as enfeoffment gifts, along with horses, chariots, weapons, and land. Human
beings were used to pay ﬁnes for offenses, and sometimes bought and sold. By
the end of the early Zhou such gifts were also being made by leading aristocrats
to their subordinates.96 This suggests an expanding farm economy in which
labor was in short supply, and kept in place and driven by coercion. At the same
time an obscure but important transformation of the kinship system crystallized it into a patriarchal, patrilineal structure that is recognizable as the

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

101

ancestor of that which existed through imperial times. With its own strict and
distinctive discipline over both juniors and women.
Chinese society was becoming regimented.
Clastres has given us the key to understanding these processes. “It is the political break that is decisive, and not the economic transformation. The true revolution in man’s protohistory is not the neolithic . . . ; it is the political revolution,
that mysterious emergence—irreversible, fatal to primitive societies—of the
thing we know by the name of the state.”97 He adds that, in general, “the tribal
chief does not preﬁgure the chief of state.”98 Critically, “the preparation and
conduct of a military expedition are the only circumstances in which the chief
has the opportunity to exercise a minimum of authority. As soon as things have
been concluded . . . the war chief again becomes a chief without power.”99 He
suggests that increasing demographic density can disrupt the otherwise tenacious primitive antipolitical order of society, and also that, by unifying
thinking, prophets may help to open the way to the state.100 In archaic China, the
modalities were different from those of the tribes Clastres studied in South
America. But, with suitable mutations, his analysis offers a new perspective on
the revolution started by the semilegendary sage–kings.
The social machinery was now in place to develop, enhance, exploit,
degrade, and in the end partially destroy, the natural environment in the same
way as the human environment. And the primary purpose of agricultural
development was the provision of tougher sinews of war. In the state of Chu
in the sixth century bce, the surveying of ﬁelds, pastures, and water channels,
as well as ﬁscal planning, was entrusted to the Minister of War. He, or his staff,
calculated “the numbers of chariots to be supplied, and made a register of the
horses, and determined the quotas of soldiers mounted in chariots and on
foot, the numbers of suits of body-armor and of shields.”101 Kriegswirtschaft.102

The politically driven economy
The economy of these early Chinese states is best described as having been
‘politically driven’. This choice of words allows for stimulation, control, and
monitoring in varying measure by political power, both central and local, but
avoids implying universal political management, which was not the case. Some
of it was of course also driven by religion, in so far as religion can be distinguished from politics during this age. The technology of fermenting wine, the
drink that put the imbiber in touch with the gods, and of the ﬁrst virtuoso
casting of richly ornamented sacriﬁcial vessels in bronze, were both the byproducts of religious faith.

102

Patterns

Over the thousand years that separated the later Shang dynasty from the Qin
empire in the third century bce transformations also took place in the social
forms through which power was exercised at the local level. In broad terms this
was a shift ﬁrst from tribal kin-groups to a type of feudalism, and then to a
rudimentary bureaucracy. A little, at least, of each was present at all three stages,
but their relative weights altered dramatically. In terms of time, the ﬁrst of these
stages covered the late Shang and early Zhou, the second the middle Zhou
through the Springs and Autumns period,103 and the third the later Zhou, that
is mainly the Warring States epoch, down to the beginning of the empire.
Detailed descriptions of the politically driven economy exist only for the
last of these three periods. They are idealized, that is to say partly imagined,
systematizations of selected real components. Though often in essence
prescriptions for the future, they present themselves, in order to sound more
authoritative, as looking back in time. In some respects they are demonstrably
anachronistic, and with little doubt also rosy and hazy. Even so, it is my intuition that they pick up the underlying economic objectives pursued by states
over this millennium, even if emphases and circumstances may have changed.
The concern for conserving the diminishing base of natural resources, for
example, seems to have been a development of the second and third stages.
Used with great caution these late materials open a window into a Chinese
mental universe of social-darwinian brutality gradually becoming explicitly
conscious of what had been implicit since much earlier days.
What was exceptional about it was not that it was exceptionally brutal, but
the degree to which it was aware of its own nature. Donald Hughes glimpses
something of the same sort of brutality in the ancient west Eurasian classical
world, but it seems to have possessed less self-understanding. He writes that a
“most damaging aspect of Greek and Roman social organization as it affected
the environment was its direction toward war. . . . Ancient cities and empires
were warrior-dominated societies, never at peace for very long. . . . Nonrenewable resources were consumed, and renewable resources exploited faster
than was sustainable. As a result, the lands where Western civilization received
its formative impulse were gradually drained.”104 The point that needs to be
added is that in both regions this was due to competitive necessity. Of course,
both Europe and China in the fullness of time found new ‘resource frontiers’
in the Middle Ages: Europe in the north, and later overseas, and China in the
south and southwest. This is part of the Chinese story we will look at in later
chapters when economic growth had acquired an independent momentum.
Discipline was of the essence. “One controls the people as one controls a
ﬂood. One feeds them as one feeds domestic animals. One uses them as one
uses plants and trees.”105 Cereals were the lifeline of government. In the realm

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

103

of an incompetent ruler, “the farmland lies uncultivated and the state capital
is empty.”106 In a poorly governed state, “the elite among the commoners will
esteem proﬁt and think little of military bravery. The masses will be addicted
to quafﬁng and feasting, and detest farming. In a situation like this, the state’s
coffers will be exhausted, and food, drink, ﬁrewood, and vegetables lacking.”107
Exploitation was a state necessity. “Production comes from expending
energy. Energy is produced by exhausting our bodies. For this reason, that the
ruler has limitless resources is because the common people exert themselves
without respite.”108 A saying quoted with approval in the context of a discussion of the need for rewards to be reliable and appropriate was, “If the goodquality farmland is not in the hands of the military ofﬁcers, within three years
the armed forces will have become feeble.”109 Elsewhere in the book, two questions are listed as needing answers when another state is being evaluated. The
ﬁrst is, “In the families of how many warrior–administrators do they farm in
person?” The second, “How many warrior–administrators own farmland but
do not farm it in person?”110 In a properly run polity, access to resources was
linked to state service.
The other side of the new dependence on farming was a perpetual terror
of famine. “If for ﬁve days people do not eat, it is like a year without a harvest.
If for seven days they have no food, the state’s territory vanishes. If for ten
days they are starving, there are no fellow human beings. All of them are
dead.”111 Unlike for the Australian aboriginal, who knows—or knew—how to
live off the land, lack of food is the ever-present unacknowledged fear shared
by all civilized people, and the hidden core of the social discipline on which
civilization is built.
Discipline apart, the crucial economic concern in this age was a shortage
of labor:112
If one walks around the ﬁelds of a city–state and its cleared outer zone,113
and takes a look at their planting and weeding, evaluating their farming on
this basis, one can tell if the state is going to suffer from famine or enjoy
plenty. If the plowing is not deep, and the weeding not done scrupulously,
so the terrain is not in proper order, and if there are numerous weeds in the
ﬁelds of hay, and if the areas cultivated are not always those of high fertility,
nor the ones uncultivated always those of low fertility, one may use the
number of inhabitants as the criterion for judging its cleared outer zone.
If the hayﬁelds are numerous and the tilled ﬁelds few, then, even in the
absence of ﬂood or drought, this is the cleared outer zone of a state that will
suffer from hunger. Under such circumstances, if the inhabitants are few in
number, there will not be enough of them to defend the territory. If, under
these same circumstances, the inhabitants are numerous, the city–state will

104

Patterns

be impoverished, and its people short of food. If a ﬂood or drought occurs,
the multitudes will scatter, and be impossible to retain. In cases where there
are not enough people to provide defense, the city walls will not be secure.
In cases where the people are short of food, it will be impossible to make
them ﬁght. If the multitudes scatter and cannot be retained, the city–state
will become a mound of ruins.114
The need to stop peasants deserting agriculture became linked to the concern
with preventing the depletion of resources:115
Even if there are wooded hills nearby, and the plants and trees there are in
ﬂourishing condition, limits must be set to the size of the houses, and prohibitions on felling imposed and lifted at the appropriate seasons. Why so?—
It is not possible to fell large trees in isolation, nor handle them in isolation,
nor transport them in isolation. [Other trees need to be cut to clear routes
for access and transport.] . . .
Even if the pools and wetlands spread far and wide, and the ﬁsh and the
turtles are plentiful, there must be regulations on the use of nets. It is not
possible to be successful solely on the basis of skill with boats and nets. This
is not the state taking plants and trees to be its private possessions, nor is it
grudging the people their ﬁsh and turtles. How can the people be allowed to
stop producing grain? This is why it is said that the kings of former times
put prohibitions on activities in the hills and wetlands in order to increase
the involvement of the people in the production of grain.
In the same spirit The Book of the Lord of Shang, a text of physiocratic
Realpolitik, argued that if the state has “the unique power over the mountains
and marshes, then the common people, who detest farming, are lazy, and want
doubled proﬁts, will have nowhere to ﬁnd something to eat. If they have
nowhere to ﬁnd something to eat, they will be obliged to engage in the cultivation of the ﬁelds.” A traditional commentary explains that ‘unique power’
meant state bans on the mountains and marshes, and that the people were
“not permitted to gather wood, to hunt, or to ﬁsh in an uncontrolled
manner.”116
The lower classes were to be kept working at their inherited tasks by means
of separate residential areas:117
The common people should not be allowed to live in heterogeneous confusion. If they do live in a heterogeneous confusion, what they say becomes
mixed up with ideas not appropriate to their station, and their activities
breach good order. For this reason the sage–kings always settled the
warrior–administrators in their own secluded dwellings. They settled the

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

105

farmers in the farmlands and the cleared outer zones. Craftsmen they settled
next to the government ofﬁces, and merchants adjacent to the marketplaces.
Each succeeding generation was to be schooled in the behavior and values that
suited its status.
Once the farmers have been settled together in groups, they will pay close
attention to the four seasons and weigh up the changing circumstances.
They will make ready the tools they need to use, plows and plowshares,
winnowing ﬂails and large sickles. When the cold weather comes, they will
bind up the straw and clear the ﬁelds to wait for the time of the year to plow;
they will then plow deeply and broadcast the seeds evenly, speedily covering
them with soil. Before the rains come, they will weed and hoe, waiting for
the ‘seasonal rains’.118
Once the seasonal rains have arrived, they will take their sickles and hoes
under their arms to toil with them from dawn till twilight in the ﬁelds and
cleared outer zones. They will take off their upper garments to go to their
work where they separate the tares from the sprouts of grain, and even up
the distances between plants. They will wear hats of China grass or rushes
on their heads, their bodies clad in coarse cloth raincoats, their persons
soaked, and their feet muddy. Their hair and skins will be exposed to the
sun. They will exhaust the energy of their four limbs to pursue unremittingly their work in the ﬁelds and the cleared outer zones.
They will have become accustomed to this since they were young, and
their hearts will be content with it. They will not be enticed into going off
elsewhere by the sight of unfamiliar things.119
As always, anxiety over the absconding of the labor force.
It was the responsibility of the minister for agriculture to “open up the
grassy lands for farming, appropriate the crop for the cities, extend the territory, stockpile grain, and increase the population.”120 The political supervision of the economy is elaborated in more detail in several places. For
example,121
It is the business of the forest wardens to see that the rules about ﬁres are
enforced, so respect is shown to the hills, wetlands,122 forests, and thick vegetation. This is because these are the sources of materials. Prohibitions should
be imposed and lifted in the appropriate seasons so that the people have
materials for their houses and stockpiles of ﬁrewood and kindling.
It is the business of the Director of Works to breach dikes to release ﬂood
waters, and to ensure throughﬂow in the irrigation and drainage channels,
to repair the levees and embankments, and to have storage reservoirs in

106

Patterns

readiness, so that even if the seasonal ﬂoods exceed due measure, no harm
is done to the cereal crops, and that, even if there is a year of severe drought,
there is grain to be sickled for harvest.
It is the business of the Director of Farming to appraise the lie of the land,
to judge which soils are more fertile and which less so, to consider what is
suited to the terrain, and to issue clear instructions as to the sequence of the
periods for each task, so that the timing of the farmers is arranged in a welladjusted fashion, and so that cereals, mulberry trees, and hemp plants are all
located where they can do well.
It is the business of the District Community Supervisors to travel through
the districts and cantons, look at the houses, examine how people plant their
crops, and grade their six domestic animals, so that their timing is arranged
in well-adjusted fashion. Also to urge on the common people so that they
labor energetically and do not behave frivolously, are happy in their homesteads, and treat leaving their district or village as a matter of gravity.
It is the business of the Director of Artisans to evaluate craftsmen of every
sort, and their activities in each season, so as to distinguish the well-made
from the coarse . . . and to ensure that none of them in the ﬁve artisans’
districts dares to cut overly fancy patterns in stone or metal.
The role of the state was thus seen as covering policing, mobilizing labor for
water-control work, giving advice, guidance and cheerleading, monitoring,
appraisal, and censorship but—hydraulics apart—not ‘management’. Of
course in real life Chinese society must time and again have wriggled partly
free from the straitjackets imposed on it, but this does not mean that the
control system did not have an impact or that we should not take it seriously,
any more than we should dismiss Mao’s commune system of the late 1950s to
the late 1970s as ‘simply’ unworkable.
The organization of a system for preventing ﬂoods proposed later in the
book does come close to prescribing political management of economic
matters. The translation that follows is precarious with respect to details, but
robust as regards the general sense. The ﬁctional simulacrum of the historic
Master Guan is presented as speaking to an equally imaginary pasteboard
Duke Huan of Qi, the title of a once-real ruler.123 It contains that element of
truth that led Karl Wittfogel to characterize China as a ‘hydraulic despotism’, a
seriously incomplete description, as we shall later see, but not foolish or
without perception.
I would request you to establish a Water Ofﬁce and to order persons experienced in hydraulics to serve as Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner.
Under their jurisdiction they will have section leaders and assistant ofﬁcers,

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

107

plus various conscripted persons of full age.124 This done they will select a
man from each side of each river to serve as supervisors of river works. These
persons will be told to make tours of inspection along the rivers.
Those who are charged with the handling of the repairs to city walls,
suburb walls, dikes, rivers, irrigation channels, pools, government ofﬁces
and residences, and other such matters in their districts, are the assigned
subalterns and conscripted persons of full age. They will be told to pass their
commoners in review on a regular basis every year in autumn once the
harvest is over, and to determine the families and the numbers of persons to
be in the groups of ten families and the groups of ﬁve, following the criterion that their lands must be adjacent to each other. The registers will distinguish between men and women, and between adults and juveniles. Those
not ﬁt for service will be excused from it. Those with deep-seated illnesses,
and unable to work, will be given sick leave. Those with a diminished
capacity for labor will perform half of the duties. At the same time they will
determine the number of military ofﬁcers liable for active service. . . .
If the ruler becomes aware of some place that has too much or too little
of something, he will send an order down to the Water Ofﬁce. The Water
Ofﬁce will make use of the military ofﬁcers liable for active service, together
with the village elders and ofﬁcials, plus the head of the ﬁve-family groups,
to visit each village. Here, through the good ofﬁces of the parents in each
household, they will systematically pass in review the equipment they have
prepared for controlling ﬂoods.
The people will make use of the time in winter when work is at a standstill. Every ten persons should have six baskets, shovels, and side-planks and
pestles for ramming earth walls, and one barrow for transporting earth, and
two carts roofed with mats to keep out the rain. Each individual should have
two vessels of his own for eating from. All these items will be securely stored
in the village so that they can be used in place of equipment that has become
worn out. . . .
During the winter, when there is little work to do, orders will be given to
the military ofﬁcers to go in turn from one staging-point to the next to
increase the stacks of cut ﬁrewood on the banks of the rivers. The district
magistrate will be in charge of them, and see to it that they do not fall
behind schedule.
After the spring equinox, the days grow longer and
It is advantageous to make use of this to construct earthworks, since the soil
is increasingly ﬁrm. Orders will be given to the military ofﬁcers to raise
levees along the banks of the larger rivers. These will be broad at the base

108

Patterns

and narrow at the top, following the line taken by the water. If there is land
in some places in which plants will not grow, it is necessary to convert it into
a polder.125 Dikes are built around the bigger ones, and embankments
around the smaller. The water will surround them on all sides, but the
harvests will not be damaged. These dikes are enlarged each year, and
planted with thorns and brambles to consolidate the earth of which they are
made. Junipers and willows are mixed in with them, as a defense against
breaches made by the ﬂood waters.
In this vision, society is close to being an army. Or the army, society.
In another passage this last idea is taken to its ultimate conclusion. Everyone
lives in units. The men go out to hunt together in the spring and fall, to master
military skills. Life is collective. The rituals of good and ill fortune are shared
in an atmosphere of emotional solidarity. The objective is a disciplined and
fearless ﬁghting society. We are told that this was once put into effect and that,
with thirty thousand such indoctrinated troops, the duke of Qi “was able to act
without restraint throughout the world.”126
Last but not least, the Master Guan stresses the value of technology. The ruler
must pay discriminating attention to the abilities of his craftsmen. They are a
key to his success. Here, too, the state was a driving force for development.127
Almost nothing in these passages is likely ever to have been fully ‘real’.
Equally, it is unlikely that anything was entirely ‘false’, pure imagining. What
we can infer from them is the crystallizing of the political logic of state-driven
economic development that had, probably originally barely consciously,
underlain the more-than-millennial quest for coercion.
In counterpoint to these grim formulas, but not in contradiction, was the
tradition, elaborated by the Daoists around the beginning of imperial times,
that recounted the loss of an original environmental innocence. Of expulsion
from a natural Paradise. The Book of the Prince of Huainan, compiled in the
second century bce, contains perhaps the most explicit version.128 It is woven
from three strands:
The ﬁrst is a mythologized folk-memory of a unity that once existed between
human beings and the world around them. Cosmic forces and seasons were in
harmony. “Winds and rains did not send down their catastrophes.” Humans
were simple and honest. “Mechanical contriving and deception were not
hidden deep in people’s hearts.” The auspicious phoenix and unicorn, symbolic
sovereigns of the bird and animal realms, ﬂew and walked on the earth.
The second strand is the tale of the destruction of this harmony by
economic development, the state, social stratiﬁcation, and war. History and

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

109

Daoist–anarchist polemic are intertwined here, but the perception of causal
interconnections is at times acute. The primacy of human action is stressed.
“The cooperative harmony of Heaven and Earth, the reshaping of the multitude of beings by the Dark Force and Bright Force are both sustained by the
vital aethers of humankind.”129 If these last become vitiated, the world is
thrown into confusion.
The ﬁnal strand is what was probably an unconscious collective recollection
of the disruption caused by the sudden fall in temperature at the beginning of
the ﬁrst millennium bce.130 That inappropriate human actions had created the
baleful aethers that had disrupted the workings of Heaven and Earth was seen
as proven by the catastrophes that had followed.
As elaborated, the story is a romantic fable. Anachronistic, too, at times, as
in its reference to iron. This should not conceal the fact that at its core, giving
it its power, is an evocation of the most critical shock in human history: the
onset of progress.
When the age of decadence arrived, people cut rocks from the mountains,
hacking out metals and jades. They extracted the pearls from oysters, and
smelted copper and iron ores. After this the multitude of living things
multiplied no longer.
They slit open the wombs of wild animals, and butchered their young,
after which the unicorn roamed about no more. They tipped over the nests
of birds and smashed the eggs, after which the phoenix ceased to soar aloft.
They extracted ﬁre with rotating drills, and structured tree trunks into
platforms. They hunted by setting the forests ablaze, and ﬁshed by draining
dry the pools. Even with less than the full number of people and full amount
of equipment, their storehouses still had a surplus. But the multitude of
living things did not proliferate. The greater part of them perished as
sprouts, or in the egg, or womb.
People heaped up the earth and lived on mounds. They manured the
ﬁelds and planted cereals. They excavated the ground and drank from wells.
They dredged the streams and turned them to advantage. They built walls
behind which they could be secure. They seized wild animals and made
them into domesticated livestock. After this, the Dark Force and Bright
Force became disordered, and the four seasons lost their proper sequence.
Thunder and bolts of lightning wrought devastation. Hail and pellets of
frozen snow sent down disasters. Fogs, frosts, and snow did not clear away,
and the multitude of living things withered.
They removed the thickets and weeds, and grouped together boundaryembankments for their ﬁelds. They sickled the rushes in the cleared spaces

110

Patterns

beyond the settlements, and caused the seeds and swelling ears to grow.
Then beyond counting were the plants and trees that perished when they
were but curving sprouts, or bearing blossoms or fruits.
Next came the great mansions and the frame-structured palaces, with
their lines of ﬂying eave-beams and their upright columns to which the
doors were locked. The protruding decorations on the battens borne by the
rafters were sculpted and incised. The ﬁve colors of the water-chestnut and
water-lily ﬂowers vied for primacy, intermingling and various. . . . [The
skilled workmen] could still not satisfy the desires of the ruler. This was why
the fungi on the roots of the pines and cypresses lay exposed to the air when
these [were felled and] turned to dead wood in summer. This was why the
Yangzi and the Yellow River, and three other major rivers, stopped ﬂowing
. . . and ﬂying locusts ﬁlled the countryside. The heavens dried up and the
earth split in ﬁssures. The phoenix descended no more, and the wild creatures with talons, fangs, and horns who sought to escape were thus impelled
to confused violence. The common people, with only thatched huts to live
in, had nowhere to seek refuge. They froze and starved, the dead lying
pillowed on each other.
Next came the demarcation of the hills, rivers, and valleys so that there
were territorial boundaries. They reckoned the populations by totals and
densities, so that they could be subdivided into units of a given number.
They built city walls, dug moats, and installed cunning devices at strategic
points so as to be ready for emergencies. They conferred a decorative
external appearance on those in government service, and established
different grades for the clothes that people might wear. They distinguished
between noble status and servile, and differentiated between the virtuous
and the unworthy by means of praise and censure, bestowing rewards and
inﬂicting punishments. Following this, offensive weapons and defensive
armor abounded, and there were divisive conﬂicts. The destruction of the
people, and their afﬂiction by death at an early age . . . arose from this.
The same story. A different point of view.

Imperial times: A brief prospect
We have a provisional answer. The process of development that transformed
most of the landscape of the archaic Chinese world began in the requirements
for success in the military rivalry between early political entities, whether states,
proto-states, or tribes. The process then gradually grew more complicated, as

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

111

economic forces, ﬁrst nurtured in good measure by the demands of the state,
moved toward an ever-increasing degree of self-propelling independence. This
second, more purely economic, aspect will be described in the chapters on
Jiaxing (in the East), Guizhou (in the Southwest), and Zunhua (in the Northeast). But the state did not disappear as a promoter of economic and technical
development either in times of imperial unity or of fragmentation. This was
most visibly so when it needed to enhance its military and other forms of
power, and occurred most commonly in frontier zones. Some of these were in
the center of what is now China during periods of imperial disunity. Here, by
way of illustration, is an example from 243 ce. The state of Wei in the North
was planning a campaign through the Huai valley to destroy the rival state of
Wu based on the lower Yangzi. A leading statesman reported to the ruler of
Wei as follows:131
Though the soil is good, there is not enough water to use to the full its
productive power. It will also be necessary to dig canals to provide water for
irrigation, so as to stockpile large quantities of military provisions, and to
serve as transportation routes for the government. . . . [South of the Huai
River] for each large-scale military expedition more than half of the troops
have to be used for transport, which is highly expensive. . . . Twenty thousand colonists should be stationed to the north of the Huai, and thirty thousand to the south. At any time, twenty per cent of the men will be off duty,
and so there will be a regular force of forty thousand men who function
simultaneously as farmers and soldiers. . . . Wu will be conquered.
The linkage between hydraulic schemes and military logistics, both the supply
of food and its cheap transport by water, had long become a commonplace in
ofﬁcial thinking.
Examples from periods of imperial unity can equally easily be found. When
Tian Le was the military commander in charge of the Northwest in the second
half of the sixteenth century his achievements in creating an iron industry
were recorded there by one of his subordinates.132
Armor, spears, arrowheads, cannons, and swords are the means of attack
and defense, but they are all matters that depend on metallurgy. Every year
the province of Shaanxi supplied Ganzhou with more than 100,900 catties133
of wrought iron for military requirements; and every year Fengxiang
supplied Xining with more than 7,500 catties of wrought iron. If there was
a shortfall, then emissaries were sent to buy more east of the passes in the
province of He'nan. This was a journey of more than a thousand kilometers,
and took months or even years. Money was wasted on nothing more than
travel and transport, and doing this was even so of no use in emergencies.

112

Patterns

H.E. Tian therefore prepared plans with his senior subordinates, and had
searches conducted everywhere in the mountains and scrublands for ores.
He also requisitioned foundry-workers from Shaanxi and Shanxi who were
capable of smelting metal and assisting in the planned operation.
I myself . . . had already mobilized some soldiers and they had located ore
at the foot of the Northern Mountains. . . . In these mountains the crystalclear rocks134 were piled up in countless quantity. Only a little over a kilometer away the mountain trees grew in profusion, providing fuel for
burning charcoal.135. . .
After this I established a government ofﬁce of six columns’ width below
the Northern Mountains, with two furnaces to smelt iron, barracks quarters
of ﬁfty units of space in extent, a signal beacon straddling the summit, and
a beacon-lodge of four columns’ width. I surrounded this last with a wall
and a moat in readiness for emergencies.
His Excellency selected four hundred foot soldiers . . . to supply the labor
for the task of ramming down the earth walls. . . . As before, personnel were
chosen to become practised in this craft, and the order further given that . . .
they should draw maps by surveying and make them available. Both those
to do the forging and those to gather fuel were chosen. It was a scheme
designed to last for a long time.
There are ﬁve advantages from this undertaking. The ﬁrst is that in Hexi,
west of the Yellow River, the region where the wars are conducted, iron
smelted in the morning can be put to use the same evening, being taken
from an inexhaustible source. The second is that, since the toil of transporting iron for more than a thousand kilometers no longer exists, the
commoner–civilians have obtained a respite. The third is immediate availability, with no delays of months and years. The fourth is that labor is
provided by soldiers who would otherwise be eating in idleness. The charcoal and ore are taken from mountain forests not subject to ofﬁcial prohibitions on felling, so the village communities are not disturbed nor the
authorities bothered by demands for funds. The ﬁfth is that the ﬁve
commanderies supply the materials for their own needs, so the neighboring
commanderies can stop supplying their quotas, and requirements for stores
and weapons are made ready at a reduced price.
What is more, those barbarians within our frontiers136 have repeatedly
been given a bloody nose in recent times by our forces. . . . When they now
further hear that we are smelting iron here, won’t they be inclined to behave
themselves?
Military power, economic development, and pressure on resources remained
interlinked. By this later period, however, when in most of China the

War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage

113

premodern economy was highly developed, the state would have almost
certainly have preferred to rely on the commercial system for the production of
iron and transport. It is only because there was nothing adequate in this remote
corner of the empire that the old relationship can be seen still functioning with
a paradigmatic clarity.
Falteringly and irregularly during early imperial times, and then more and
more clearly by the later Tang and the Song dynasties, a duality became established. Coercive organization, its roots in the archaic past, continued to be the
deﬁning feature of some important areas of economic activity. This was
notably the case for large-scale water-control systems, whether they were irrigation channels, river levees to stop ﬂoods, or seawalls to keep out the salt tides
and storm surges. In contrast, relatively small, free, and privately owned units,
whether they were farms practising agriculture of a gardening-like intensity,
craftsmen’s workshops, or businesses built around partnerships and families,
characterized much of the rest of the economy, especially in Ming and Qing
times. These latter lived in a world of commercialized competition far
removed from the imposed monopoly inherent in large hydraulic and other
state-run systems, such as the transport of tax-grain from the South to the
North under the Ming dynasty. This last employed on the order of 150,000
men and shifted about a quarter of a million tons of rice a year.137
What ﬁnally emerged was a symbiosis, and any description of the later imperial Chinese economy that focuses only on one of these aspects, falsiﬁes. It was
both controlled and free, both pulverized and gargantuan. Simultaneously.
The next four chapters take this complex story or, more accurately, major
parts of it, through the two millennia of imperial times. The chapter that follows
looks at perhaps the most enduringly important aspect of the state side: the
world of the colossal water-control undertakings made possible by Chinese
administrative virtuosity in planning, organizing, conscripting, taxing, and
coercing. These reshaped the Chinese physical environment, and committed a
large part of the Chinese economy to a paradoxical relationship with water that
was startlingly productive yet relentlessly costly to maintain, protective yet
intermittently terrifyingly hazardous, and, above all, one from which it could
not, and has not to date been able to, extricate itself. The three chapters after that
on water control look at how the pattern of premodern economic growth in
China, ever more based, as the centuries passed, on the creation of private initiatives, made its impact on three very different environments.
The two systems of course intertwined. As I have suggested in the ‘Introductory Remarks’, the mature imperial Chinese style of development was
based on a capacity to operate through highly disaggregated units that could,
when necessary, be coordinated either administratively or commercially to

114

Patterns

form, as needed, enormous modular aggregates that were inherently transient,
existing only while immediately required. It was this combination of smallunit initiative and all but unlimited facultative aggregation that produced a
sustained thoroughness of environmental exploitation that was probably
distinctive, at least on any large scale, in the premodern world.

6
Water and the Costs of System
Sustainability
Control of water has long been at the heart of farming—especially irrigated
rice production—and of bulk transport in the most densely populated parts of
China. Hence at the center of its later premodern economic history. Over the
long run, and moving up an extended learning curve with many failures, it was
by world-historical standards both successful and sustained.1 The eventual
price was high: commitment to a system that required incessant and expensive
maintenance and that, after a certain point had been reached, was all but
impossible to expand further. The environment imposed limitations on the
availability of suitable locations and on quantities of water.
Central to the argument that forms the core of this chapter is the point that
man-made systems of water control are to a greater or lesser degree inherently
unstable, and constantly in interaction with disruptive external environmental
factors. They are affected by rainfall, ﬂooding, drought, the removal or reestablishment of vegetation cover, erosion effecting the transport and deposition of sediments, the drainage of wetlands, irrigation, salinization, and
incursions of the sea. Water-control systems are where society and economy
meet the environment in a relationship that is more often than not adversarial.
Systems vary. Some are concerned with defense. Levees along the banks of
the great rivers protect the farmlands outside. Seawalls keep the surges of the
tides and storms at bay, and prevent salt water poisoning the fertility of the
land. Others are designed for drainage, as wetlands are converted into paddies.
Others again for irrigation, often storing water in lakes and reservoirs, then
redirecting it, and distributing it through channels and sluices. Premodern
industries often require the motive power provided by streams and rivers.
Large cities need engineered systems for the provision of drinking water. Also

116

Patterns

for the disposal of waste; and who gets the water ﬁrst, when its quality is still
good, can be a matter of social and political status.
An example of this last point was the Li Canal, which was built in 809 ce and
provided the modest-sized city of Yuanzhou in Jiangxi (in the Center) with
water for drinking, washing, ﬁghting ﬁres, and transport. Upstream the water
was also used to drive mills; downstream it ended as an all-purpose sewer. Since
the mills slowed the current, they were in due course banned. Encroachment by
houses eventually made the waterway in the city too narrow for boats. A
permanent organization under canal chiefs was set up to stop people throwing
rubbish into the stream, and it was forbidden to build kitchens or privies that
abutted onto the water. With limited effect. Where it ﬁrst entered, and ﬂowed
through ofﬁcial gardens, it was clear. Lower down was a different story. Social
position was inversely correlated with exposure to pollution.2
Canals need to be kept topped up to a level at which boats can proceed
along them, no small task when staircases of locks take them up and down the
slopes of hills, as was the case with the Ming and Qing Grand Canals. And
when water is in short supply, these locks have to be kept closed, with the boats
dragged along haulovers around them. It was for this reason—scarcity of
water—that, although the Chinese in the Song dynasty invented the pound
lock,3 which ﬁlls and ﬂushes, and whose gates open and shut to permit the
passage of boats, they made little use of it. Another environmental constraint
on economic technology, since haulovers require smaller vessels.
Watermills and hydraulic triphammers and presses, and norias—huge
openwork wheels that lift water in containers ﬁxed around their circumference—likewise need strong currents and races to furnish them with power.
These different needs—especially irrigation, transport, power, and drinking—
are to some extent in competition with each other. Conﬂicts between rival
interests, and between rival areas, such as those upstream and those downstream, and those that are from time to time sacriﬁced as ﬂood overspill basins
versus those that are not, are common to most systems.
An example is Mianyang (in the Center), where the Han River empties into
the Yangzi. In the middle of the nineteenth century small-scale battles were
fought by armed protesters from the south bank who saw themselves as being
victimized by their side of the river being ﬂooded, with government approval,
during periods of peak discharge. They favored ﬂooding the north. The rebels
were triumphant for a time, and built ‘illegal’ dikes to protect the south, which
thereafter enjoyed improved harvests. According to the provincial government, if the local people “failed even slightly to do as they wished, they would
drive off their cattle and smash up their houses.”4 River water meant quarrels.
And in an extreme case gang-warfare hydraulics, as here.

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

117

It could also mean a sort of proto-democracy. In Shanghai county (in the
East) after about 1775, when the county magistrate wanted the creeks dredged,
he often summoned an assembly of local notables to provide him with advice
and legitimation. In view of the materials quoted from the Master Guan in the
preceding chapter, and the common but oversimple belief that water control
in China was the changeless bedrock of despotism, it is worthwhile quoting—
as an explicit proof that this was not so—one of the characteristically tedious
and detailed documents that proliferated in late-imperial hydraulic administration. It concerns the Chaojia Creek in 1870:
Zhu Fengti, the acting county magistrate, called together the [gentry] directors and [commoner] wardens of the county, from both city and countryside.
It was concluded after a discussion that in 1836 the whole county had
provided laborers on the basis of acreage [owned by each landowner], no
wages being given for the quantity dredged, and administrative expenses
being provided by the ofﬁcials. In 1858 a payment had been made [to the
workers] for the amount dredged and administrative charges had all been
met from unallocated levies and ﬁnes, no money being taken from the
landowners and tenants of the county. In recent years the ofﬁcials had
become poor and the commoners rich; the latter had ample resources since
the reduction of taxes. . . . They requested that . . . a levy on acreage should be
imposed. . . . Where the ‘market river’ [used for transport] was twisty or
turbulent, or encumbered with sand banks, reeds, or irrigation channels,
places in the past being designated as tedious or difﬁcult, and such that the
normal payment per hundred cubic feet of mud was insufﬁcient, it had been
the practice of the [gentry] group directors who were in charge of the
dredging to advance the difference. Usually the work had been ﬁnished off
carelessly, the waterway hardly being dredged before it silted up again. The
gentry directors suggested that on this occasion the best thing to do would be
to make additional payments for the difﬁcult parts. . . . In addition, the
miscellaneous expenses for pumps, for embankments, for the salaries of
deputies [potential ofﬁcials on secondment to special duties], for retinues
and sedan chairs for the directors, and for the clerks and constables should
all be reported to the county magistrate.5
By this period this was the routine way of doing things, not despotic but
perhaps best described as a ‘consultative oligarchy under central legitimation’.
In some other areas it approached proto-democracy. An example is the
Sangyuan polderland in Guangdong province.6 Here there were regular annual
meetings of publicly selected representatives and systematic public selection of
hydraulic managers.7 When water is a menace the need for collective action

118

Patterns

against danger may reinforce social bonds. The Qing gazetteer for Sangyuan
polder observed:8
If the West River is in spate, and the dikes in danger, the villages concerned
at once beat gongs. The neighboring villages pass on the message from one
to the other, and come hurrying in response. This is something that
concerns the lives of the men of the various wards, and of their families.
They never fail to hasten.
The need for this solidarity is explained by the mid-Qing gazetteer for
Songjiang prefecture south of the Yangzi estuary:9
An entire polder is interdependent. It is even so exceedingly hard to bring
people’s feelings into unison, since, if a polder contains a thousand mou of
land, it will not have fewer than several tens of families. If, however, the wall
of the polder for one family’s holding has collapsed, then the wall in sound
condition in the rest of the polder is useless. Under these circumstances, the
poor and rich will give each other mutual support.
Contrast this with the case of Mianyang given above. A difference in the
hydraulic environment could change how people behaved toward each other.
Commercialized water systems also existed in north China by the nineteenth century. In East River Village, near Baotou, watered vegetable gardens
were funded with money from the pawnbroking business and other trades.
Operations were handled by a Gardens Guild, whose ninety or so members
held ‘water shares’ and contributed to costs in proportion to the number held.
The post of Garden Head was held by every member in turn, but for a period
of time determined by his share-holding. The channels were the common
property of the Guild, but the ‘water shares’ were bought, sold, and borrowed
independently from the ownership of land.10
As will be shown later, ‘hydraulic despotism’ is not a total myth,11 but, as
should be apparent from the above, an inadequate description of a more
complex situation that also changed over time.
Huge amounts of labor, money, materials such as stones and wood, and
administrative skill are usually needed to build and to maintain water-control
systems. Consider this description in the gazetteer for Shangyu, on the south
side of Hangzhou Bay (in the Southeast), of what was needed to rebuild just
under 20,000 feet of seawall in 1347:12
The method is to use, for every 10 feet, 32 pine trees 1 foot in diameter and
8 feet in length. These are set in 4 rows, unevenly and sunk deeply into the
ground. After this, stones 5 feet long and a half of this in width are laid at
right angles to each other in an interlocking pattern on top of the level

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

119

stones [base stones?] in 5 layers, all set into each other like dog’s teeth,
so they cannot be dislocated. In places where there is a depression in the
sands on the seaward side they build 8 layers. The height is over 10 feet. The
top is covered with ﬂagstones so as to seal it with their pressure. On the
landward side there is a ﬁll of stone rubble to a depth of more than 1 foot,
and then earth is banked up next to it. The base is 20 feet wide, and the top
diminishes to a quarter of this.
Approximate calculations indicate that this fairly short sector—on the order of
6 kilometers compared to the total south Jiangsu and north Zhejiang seawall’s
length of over 400 kilometers—would have needed about 63,000 trunks, and
close to a million cubic feet of stone. This sort of structure was more durable
than the earlier earth-and-brushwood seawalls often found in this region,
which had to be rebuilt every three years. It therefore probably economized on
labor over the long run. But such hydraulic works devoured forests and the
output of quarries.
Also human beings. The gazetteer for Huating county, on the south of the
Yangzi estuary, has this to say about the repairs to the seawall in the late nineteenth century:13
At the present time the wall is always rebuilt in the dog days of the summer.
The laborers are boiled and scalded by the scorching heat, suffering
sunstroke in the daytime and exposed to the dews at night. I do not know
how many in all are suddenly smitten with ‘cholera’ or heatstroke, and die at
the foot of the wall.
This takes place, moreover, in the midst of the busy season for farming.
Most of them cannot come to the work as this would require their being in
two places at once. The wardens and seawall constables take advantage of
this to cheat them. Each mou of land incurs three to four hundred cash, this
being known as ‘purchasing leisure’. If any are obdurate and refuse to pay
up, wanting to go and scoop up mud, the constables and wardens will always
ﬁnd some pretext to make them melt or dry out in the ferocious sun, vexing
them in many ways until they have no option but to beg for release.
This passage is late enough in date for the ‘cholera’ to have been true cholera,
which ﬁrst arrived in China from Bengal around 1820, though there is no way
of being certain that it was.14 The concentration at the worksite in the warm
part of the year of a large number of workers in close contact with each other,
with poor sanitation, improvised accommodation, and a high level of stress,
would certainly have facilitated the spread of an infectious disease of this sort:
one mainly passed on through infected faeces, contaminated drinking water
and food, and ﬂies.

120

Patterns

The hydrological instability of almost all systems, due to wear and tear, and
to the deposition of sediments that requires either dredging channels or the
heightening of dike-walls as river beds rise, makes the burden perpetual. Far
more is spent over the long run on maintaining a system than is ever expended
on its creation. And while hydraulic systems are hydrologically unstable, they
are also economically inherently static. There are limits to accessible runoff
and rainfall, and to suitable topography. Ground water only replenishes itself
at a ﬁxed rate. Once the opportunities that are proﬁtable given a particular
level of skill have been used up, trying to go further is a waste of resources.
This is what seems to have happened in China by the end of the middle Qing.15
To visualize the brake on dynamism created by hydraulic systems after the
initial surge of increased production and productivity, imagine trying to
double-track the late-imperial Grand Canal that ran north from Hangzhou (in
the East) to just outside Beijing (in the Northeast). In other words, to build a
second canal parallel to it. It would have been impossible. Not enough usable
water ﬂowed off the hills. This was particularly evident in Shandong, where
the Canal went over the western spurs of the Mount Tai massif. The summer
ﬂoods carried so heavy a load of suspended sediment that directing them into
the Canal would soon have silted it up, and they had therefore to be diverted
into the sea by an alternative channel. The clearer but less abundant winter
and spring water was stored at the summit in a reservoir. It was drawn through
a feeder-river into the canal when the convoys with grain for Beijing were
passing through, after a temporary dike had been built across the mouth of the
alternative channel. Once the ﬂotillas had gone by, this dike had to be demolished again, year in year out. Preventing the feeder-river from shifting its
course entirely to the alternative channel was also a headache, requiring more
engineering.16 It was thus not normally possible to retain enough water in the
Canal for it to be open over this stretch round the year, even as a single track.
A railroad is not subject to this sort of limitation.
The long-term survival of Chinese water-control systems was variable. In
some the technology reached apparent near-perfection early and endured; in
others it crumbled and declined; and in others again it grew ever more reﬁned
with the passing of the millennia. Two examples will suggest the complexities
of hydraulic histories and show how Chinese hydraulic engineering both
changed its environment and was, in turn, constrained by it, and even—sometimes—broken by it.
The state of Qin in the Northwest, which was in due course to unify the
empire in the second half of the third century bce, increased the effectiveness
of its preconquest war-machine by taking over one great irrigation scheme and
creating another. They were to have different fates. One is still operating. The

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

121

other declined quite rapidly, and in spite of repeated efforts over the centuries
to revive it, proved impossible to restore as a large-scale integrated system.
When Qin absorbed the state of Shu, in present-day Sichuan province (in
the West), toward the end of the fourth century BCE, it acquired the Min River
irrigation network which had been built where this river leaves the mountains
and ﬂows out across a fan-shaped plain that slopes down at an almost ideal
angle, between 0.29 per cent and 0.42 per cent.17 The principles were simple:
gravity was the motive force, no pumping was needed, and water was diverted
from the main stream into distribution channels, where it was drawn on for
irrigation, and the residue returned to the main course over a hundred kilometers downstream. The art lay in the details. Some of these may have been added
in later times, so what follows is a composite picture rather than one precisely
focused on a particular moment in antiquity. But the basic concept was old.
First, it was necessary to stabilize, in so far as possible, the quantity of water
entering the system. At low water the Min ﬂows at about 500 cubic meters per
second; but at peak discharge this rises to 5000 or even 6000 cubic meters
per second. The second problem was more difﬁcult: keeping the channels from
being ﬁlled with deposited sediment. The slowing of the current reduced
its competence to carry suspended particles. Thus the channels tended to ﬁll
up over time.
The solution adopted was twofold. First, regular dredging was carried out in
the winter during low water. Fifty-seven per cent of the rainfall today falls
between June and September, and the pattern was probably broadly similar
two millennia ago. This was in accordance with the advice of the ﬁrst director
of the scheme, Li Bing: “Clear out the deposits of mud to a good depth, and
build the dikes low.”18 Second, a bend was engineered upstream of the main
diversion intake in such a way that much of the suspended sediment was
deposited on its inner side, as the result of the slower ﬂow there, and the
subsidiary helicoidal current in the plane at right angles to the main current.19
These deposits were then ﬂushed out periodically by opening another channel
that led back directly into the original main course of the Min but was
normally closed off, while at the same time shutting the regular diversionary
intake on the outside of the bend, which was normally left open. The ﬂushing
channel was kept shut by a barrage of huge bamboo baskets ﬁlled with heavy
stones and resting on a ﬁxed stone sill, which also served as a spillway regulating the height of the water in the system. Hence it could be an emergency
overﬂow during heavy ﬂoods, or even a sort of safety valve, since the gabions—
the stone-ﬁlled bamboo baskets—could be swept away. Hard and dangerous
labor was required each year to remove and then later replace these baskets.
They were three feet in diameter and ten feet long, at least in Tang times, from

122

Patterns

which these ﬁgures come. The productivity of the system could thus only be
preserved and the original investment safeguarded by costly maintenance. In
fact, the Min irrigation scheme has proved a champion among irrigation
schemes for survival. In spite of the repeated destruction of the main diversion
head, and of the crescent-shaped dikes that fashion the artiﬁcial bend, an
expanded and updated version is still working today.20
The second example is the Zheng Guo canal, north of the Wei River in what
is today Shaanxi province (in the Northwest). It had a different fate. Started a
little later than the Min scheme, in 246 bce, it took heavily silt-laden water
from the Jing River along a contour-line to the Luo River. In the ﬁrst part of
its course it released water into the ﬁelds below, where, in the words of a Handynasty ditty, “it served as both irrigation and fertilizer.” This was also an effective way of combating the salinity of much of the land. The average gradient
of its two-hundred-kilometer course was 0.64 per mil, which indicates a
masterly level of surveying skill. Its critical contribution was to feed the people
living ‘within the passes’, where the Qin dynasty and the Han after it, both had
their capitals. The historian Sima Qian attributed Qin’s triumph to this
hydraulic system. Without adopting any such monocausal explanation, it is
reasonable to accept that economic development was an important part of
military and political hegemony.21
Why didn’t it survive?
The story has been masterfully covered by Pierre-Étienne Will.22 Here we
need only review his conclusions and comment on them. The region today has
a subarid climate, perhaps more so than two thousand years ago, largely alkaline surface soils, and an unstable topography based on loess, which is in origin
a wind-blown, powdered rock. The Jing River, which fed the system, steadily
cut down its bed, and this made it harder and harder to continue drawing off
enough water without opening new intakes further upstream. Large variations
in the summer spate also made stable engineering difﬁcult. The silt in the
water, originally described as fertilizing, gradually became more sterile,
perhaps because it came from lower soil horizons. The original system became
partially defunct quite rapidly, probably between the end of the Han and the
beginning of the Tang. An adjunct system, the Bai Canal, opened in 95 bce,
continued to work, however.
During the Tang, water mills took so much water away from farming that
the government had repeatedly to order their destruction. Resource shortage
prompting the usual conﬂicts.
By the middle of the tenth century the Bai, too, was in difﬁculties. A
dam across the river was installed each year to raise the level of water intake, but
was usually eventually swept away. By the fourteenth century, at its largest,

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

123

this temporary barrage had to be 850 feet across and 85 feet in depth. It seems
to have been made from containers of interwoven vegetation containing earth
and stones. When the intake point was later moved higher up, smaller structures
were adequate. In the ﬁfteenth century a feeder tunnel was cut in an attempt to
revive the system, but silting up and the weariness of the workforce meant that
reliance had mostly to be placed after this time on the tapping of local springs,
but the amount they could supply was minute compared to the river.
Ingenuity was used to ease the worst natural hazards: damage done by the
intermittent ﬂooding of the Jing, and torrents carrying rocks down the gullies
that the contour-line feeder canal had to traverse at right angles. Overﬂow
tunnels were excavated; grille-like barriers were erected across the gullies to let
water through but block the débris, and the canal was roofed at key points to
let gully runoff ﬂow over it.
Finally, the mass mobilization of unpaid labor was not feasible under the
Qing to the same degree as it had been under earlier dynasties. Long-term
socio-political change thus restricted the options of hydraulic planners
dreaming of restoring the grandeur of antiquity. By the eighteenth century, in
spite of an extensive survey and more efforts at rehabilitation, it was clear that
drilling wells was the most reliable basis for irrigated farming, though only a
few well-to-do households could afford the pumps to make the lifting and
distribution of water easy. Thus environmental pressures made the technology
go, in a sense, backward over time. Until the 1930s that is, when the ﬁrst use of
modern engineering opened the possibility of new Faustian bargains.
In general, the Chinese water-control economy had become caught by the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in a form of premodern ‘technological
lock-in’. ‘Technological lock-in’ is a concept used in economic theory to
describe cases where an established but second-best technology continues to
dominate because of advantages that derive from its prior establishment. In
the words of W. Brian Arthur, “Increasing-returns mechanisms . . . can . . .
cause economies . . . to become locked into inferior paths of development. . . .
Technological conventions . . . tend to become locked-in by positive feedback.”23 At the present day these include investment in the training of those
using, servicing, and selling the existing system, and the availability of compatible accessories and interfaces.24
I have adopted the idea here to describe a premodern situation where the
commitment of an economic and social system to a particular technology—
Chinese-style hydraulics—had proceeded to the point where (1) its voluntary
abandonment would have led to immediate losses in production, and often
social stability and physical security, that were unacceptable under normal
conditions, and (2) a substantial proportion of the economy’s currently available

124

Patterns

resources (notably money, labor, materials, skills, and political and organizational capacity) were required for the maintenance of the system. The effect was
that a sizable part of the future was, so to speak, ‘mortgaged’. If, as in the case of
the Zheng-Bai, it broke down irretrievably, a huge investment was forfeited.
Expansion within the available technology had also reached a virtual dead end.
An estimate of the true cost of the system should therefore ideally include the
loss of the opportunity to use a signiﬁcant amount of this proportion of output
in a different, and possibly ultimately more productive, fashion. Obviously
modern technology has now radically altered the possibilities. The magniﬁcent
but onerous heritage of the past remains.

Changing patterns
Organization reﬂected environment. Thus on the west shore of Lake Erhai (in
the Southwest) the so-called Eighteen Streams that came down the vertiginous
side of an elongated mountain ridge tended to readjust their courses over the
alluvial fans at the foot of the ridge whenever they silted up. This caused little
lasting damage, and no massive organization for their maintenance was
required.25 In contrast, on the northern side, was the Miju River, so heavily
loaded with sediment that it eventually ran above the level of the surrounding
ﬁelds, like a miniature Yellow River. In late-imperial times it built up a spectacular delta, which was cellularized into diked ﬁelds protruding out far into
the lake. The Miju came to require the labor of many thousand men each year.
This need developed over time as upstream clearance of surface vegetation
released more sediment into the water. The shift from a relaxed communitybased maintenance system to a tightly bureaucratized one from the ﬁfteenth
to the nineteenth century can be followed in the documents.
Repairs under ofﬁcial auspices are ﬁrst recorded between 1403 and 1424, and
three more times down to 1506–1521. At this time military-colony soldiers maintained the dike on the east side, and commoner–civilians that on the west.26 A
bureaucratic system for the regular yearly repair of the dikes is said to have ﬁrst
been put into place by the local government some time between 1436 and 1469,
but cannot have worked well, as there was a crisis in the middle of the sixteenth
century. The 1563 gazetteer for Dali prefecture says, or quotes someone as
saying, without being clear about the exact dates concerned,
For the last thirty years no one has been paying close attention, and [the
dikes] have almost completely fallen in ruin. Those who have debated the
issue have decided to order workers to be levied according to the acreage

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

125

[owned by the landlords served by the system], and boundaries for sectors
to be established and inscribed on stone as a visible record of permanently
ﬁxed regulations.
Every year in the ﬁrst lunar month, on the day following the rural district
drinking meeting, without waiting for anyone to lead him, each person shall
proceed to the work of banking up the earth and planting trees. Anyone
who arrives a day late shall be ﬁned according to what is announced by a
collective discussion. This is to be done constantly every year.27
Community-based maintenance was still the desideratum, though now under
government surveillance.
A débâcle of 1552, when the defenses broke, prompted a further response
from the ofﬁcials. The quantitative details of maintenance work were laid
down, such as the number of ‘dragon caves’—lateral open conduits—to be
provided for draining off water. They concluded by remarking “That the
soldiers are exhausted at the present time, and the commoner–civilians
impoverished, is not due to any lack of fertility in the soil but to inadequacies
in the management of water.”28 The cost of repairs in terms of the timber and
stone needed, as well as in labor, was likewise becoming high. The 1563
gazetteer describes a society already under pressure:
Those who own land sometimes have to sell it. Those without land are sometimes obliged to perform hard labor-services, their hair becoming grey
because of their lack of rest. Nor are the women and children in tranquillity.
In emergencies they demolish their fences and walls to block up the breached
dikes. When times are calmer they steal the timber used for the engineering
work to supply their private cooking.29 Those who watch over the system are
not capable of dealing with these vexations. Those who do the reconstruction are wearied with their sufferings. At the worst it even happens that landlords along the east side dike criminally breach the dike to the west, and
landlords along the west dike criminally breach the dike to the east.30
In fact, the system proved sustainable. As always, there was a price.
Organization was improved between 1628 and 1643, with more changes
shortly after 1736. The responsibility for speciﬁc lengths of dike was assigned
on the basis of taxes paid by landowners. Workers were sent out in the middle
of the ﬁrst lunar month, and at this period normally worked for a month, their
effectiveness being checked on by the ofﬁcials. Further changes introduced by
the department magistrate shortly before 1795 did not yield good results,
however; the organization was overhauled once more in 1818, and then again
twice more by three different department magistrates. These repeated efforts

126

Patterns

ensured a period of stability after the disasters of 1815–17. Defensive hydraulic
engineering above the main gorge at the head of the river’s lower course,
designed to reduce the silt it carried, also played a part.
Essentially, what had been happening was that the increased loads of sediments carried by the Miju River, because of land clearance and deforestation
upstream, had raised its bed, and made it necessary both to keep dredging it
and building the dikes higher and higher. From 1828 to 1843 the river bed in the
course immediately below the gorge rose by 10 feet in spite of dredging. Stone
columns were then installed as markers to provide a measure of the depth of
dredging needed.31 Despite this, by some time not too far into the Qing
dynasty a substantial proportion of the course of the Miju immediately south
of the gorge was running above the level of the rooftops of houses on the
surrounding land, as it still does today. By the early nineteenth century the
clearing and dredging required sixty thousand men during the period from
the ﬁrst lunar month to early in the fourth month, though not continuously,
and half again that number to rebuild the embankments.32
A general manager of the Miju dikes in the middle Qing period wrote the
story in dramatic terms:
Ordinary rivers travel through the land. Only the Miju travels above the
land. Ordinary rivers all penetrate deeper [with time], but the Miju ﬁlls up
every year with deposited sediment. These are the major contrasts. . . . In
the region of the Mao Family gorge [in the upper catchment above the main
gorge] everything is broken peaks, hateful precipices, streams that lose
themselves, and fragmented valleys gathered together or scattered about.
They unite at Three Rivers’ Mouth. Whenever a wind from the northwest
arises, mountain soil, whirling dust, and ﬂying stones frequently strike one
in the face. With the arrival of summer and fall the continuous heavy rains
destroy the ridges and split the valleys open. Stones from the mountains
and sediments in the gorges come down in the frenzied current, a ﬂood like
a landslide, its breakers roaring with a sound like stones falling. On every
side it is blocked off, with no way through. It only drains out by way of
Putuo Gorge [the main gorge], but over the years the people of Langqiong
[above this gorge] have used huge claws to push the clogging piled-up sediments at the Three Rivers’ Mouth downstream. Under these circumstances,
water and stones from all directions have treated Dengchuan as their
drainage ditch. The origins of the afﬂictions suffered by the Miju River in
fact lie in this.
When it goes south from here there are the mountains of the Black Ants
Gorge and Serpent Gorge. All of them are bodies without a full covering of
skin [that is, they have no vegetation]. They are inserted in the river’s bed,

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

127

lofty and vertical. Their sands ﬂy about and their stones shift along, more
and more helping the [river’s] power to ﬁll up the Erhai Lake. Thus the
route of one long river receives the sands and gravels of a hundred courses.
To begin with, it is as if bound in the coils of ravines and gorges. When it
reaches the Upper Gong Sands [at the bottom of the main gorge]. . . , it
suddenly opens out and rushes along rumbling like startled thunder,
speeding like a myriad horses almost wishing to take all thirty kilometers of
level plain and soil embroidered [with crops and houses] for the pleasure of
its swiftly sweeping position-power. In all the spatial structure of the river
there is no danger to equal that which is here.
Next, downstream from Wangwu . . . the entire river is as perilous as
suspended scaffolding. Wherever there is a bay or bend, one further feels the
ﬂying foam and the press of the spray. The shaking is out of the ordinary.
It is always here that ﬂooding over happens and that breaches that are
naturally caused occur . . . .
In summer and fall the current is turbid. Silts and sands come down
together, but the sediment that accumulates in the river has always entered
the Erhai, [so,] with the passing of time, the mouth of the Erhai has become
obstructed, and the tail end of the river [its entry into the lake] has also
grown congested. For this reason, thirty years ago the place where the river
entered the Erhai was [just] downstream of the Water Lock Pavilion. Today
[circa 1854–5] it is about 2.5 to 3 kilometers distant. [A linear extension rate
approaching 0.09 kilometers per year.] . . . It is undoubted that there are
advantages for the people living in the neighborhood, but harm is caused to
the upper reaches. The reason is that greed for the proﬁts from [new] ﬁelds
formed by the accumulation of silt and [the consequent] lack of dredging it
clear, causes the tail end of the river to narrow to the extent that it will not
admit boats. If the anus is not wide open, the digestion is incommoded. The
disaster of ﬂooding over arises from this. Furthermore the disasters of sediments and stones are endured all the way from the source to the tail . . . .
Dengchuan’s disasters are from water, but what provokes these disasters
in fact comes from the mountains. In all the mountains the aethers of metal
are weighty, and many of them lack vegetation cover. If it has no vegetation
cover, the surface of a mountain will be bare and reddish, and it will be easy
for it to be stripped and [for material] to fall, and for it to become permeated with water. When the cliffs and valleys are full of holes, heavy rains set
the sediments in ﬂight off lines of ridges and contiguous ranges. Shifting
rocks and speeding currents form landslides and ﬂoods with a tumultuous
hubbub, competing for a way through as they come down. This is the reason
large rivers ﬂood over and branch streams become choked with alluvium.

128

Patterns

An array of discussions of policies, from both ancient and modern times,
to keep rivers in check exists, but I have never heard of keeping mountains
in check.33
In fact the deforestation and clearance were new. Transformation of the environment on the hillslopes above the main gorge, probably due to population
pressure, had led to new environmental problems below it, and these
prompted the formation of a new and more disciplined type of socio-political
organization, with a higher level of direct state involvement. This case is
important in that it shows the changing chains of cause and effect that could
exist between human impact on the environment and resulting adaptations in
the structure of human society.
The sections that follow describe two of the largest water-control systems in
imperial China, following up the theme outlined in the previous chapter, that
of the part played by the state in driving economic development. To keep the
picture balanced, it should be remembered that the majority of hydraulic
schemes in imperial times were relatively small-scale, and that the state’s main
role in their regard was only arbitrating disputes between the participants, or
re-establishing a local hydraulic organization that had decayed. Supervision
rather than hands-on management. A number of these more autonomous
operations—not unlike that for the early Miju—will also be described in the
three chapters that follow, when the focus shifts to the environmental impacts
of small-unit enterprises.

The south-course Yellow River
From 1194 until 1853–5 the ﬁnal section of the Yellow River ran to the sea south
of the Shandong peninsula. For all the period of recorded history previously,
though not the longer span of what might be called ‘geomorphologist’s time’,
it had run out to the north. This southern chapter of the story forms a cameo
that illustrates most of the hydrological problems of imperial times, and the
techniques adopted to tackle them. Above all, the unending battle between
natural and human forces. Hydrology versus hydraulics.
One talks of a single southern course, but in fact it took a number of different
routes downstream of the Kaifeng region. Before 1578 these were usually
multiple at any given time, interacting in a variety of ways with the Huai River
whose mouth the Yellow had captured (see Map 1). The scale of the man-made
effects that resulted from the struggles to control the merged ﬂows was probably
unequalled anywhere in premodern history. Tables 2 and 3 below summarize

129

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

the sedimentological data, without attempting to show minor changes, with the
crucial exception of distinguishing the periods before and after 1578, when manmade effects become strikingly apparent.
Table 2 shows the long-term pattern of land formation in what is now the
abandoned delta compared with the recent pattern of land formation in the
gulf of Bohai since the river moved back north. A recent estimate is that the
Huai coastal plain was growing at about 2.55 square kilometers per year before
1194.34 The Yellow River’s shift to the southern course thus more than doubled
this rate.
Table 2 Land formation by the Yellow River on its southern and northern
courses, from 1194 to 1983
Course

Period

Duration†
(years)

Land formed
(km2)

Rate of land formation
(km2/year)

South
South
North
North
North
North

1194–1577
1578–1854
1855–1908
1909–53
1954–70
1976–83

384
277
54
45
17
8

2300
6700
1239
588
270
261

5.99
24.19
22.94
13.07
15.88
32.63

Total*
Mean

1194–1983

785

11 358

14.47

* Excluding 1971–5
†
The calculations have been adjusted to avoid double counting the years at the boundaries between
periods.

Source: Li Yuanfang, “Fei-Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de yanbian” [Changes in the deltas of the abandoned
Yellow River], Dili xuebao 10.4 (1991), 37.

The ﬁrst point to be noted is the shift in the scale of delta deposition after the
later sixteenth century. Initially, at least, this was a man-made effect due to a
change in hydraulic technology. Since it was also a long-term phenomenon,
and there was some reversion at times to an earlier hydraulic approach, there
were probably other contributing causes. The relative uniﬁcation of the course
was not undone, so its carrying power was greater, and under the Qing dynasty
there was intensiﬁed stripping of the vegetation cover along the middle course
of the river.
Table 3 presents estimates for the advance of land in the Yellow River delta
and the accretion of sedimentary deposits during the period of the southern
course. The effect of the hydraulic engineering by Pan Jixun (on whom more
later) is visible in the bold type of row 2. By unifying the course of the river
and eliminating multiple channels, and then constricting the channel that

130

Patterns

remained, he unintentionally raised the level of the bed of the channel at the
mouth by more than 2 meters in 13 years. The reason, which he had overlooked, was that it was here that the current, after scouring the lower course at
an increased speed, had then to slow down, and so dropped much of its load.
Table 3 The speed of advance, and the rate of accretion, of the Yellow River delta
from 1195 to 1854
Period†

Duration

Advance

(years)
1195–1578
1579–91
1592–1700
1701–47
1748–76
1777–1803
1804–10
1811–55
Total*
Mean
†

(km)

Speed of
advance
(m/year)

Rate of
accretion
(cm/year)

Total
accretion
(m)

384
13
109
47
29
27
7
45

15.0
20.0
13.0
15.0
5.5
3.0
3.5
14.0

39
1538
119
319
190
111
500
311

0.4
16.6
1.8
3.4
2.0
1.2
5.4
3.1

1.536
2.158
1.908
1.598
0.580
0.324
0.378
1.395

661

89.0

135

1.5

9.877

The terminal dates of the periods have been adjusted for consistency.

* For slightly different ﬁgures, see Wan Yansen, “Subei gu Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de yanbian” [Changes
in the old delta of the Yellow River in northern Jiangsu], Haiyang yu huzhao 20.1 (1989).
Source: Ye Qingchao, “Shilun Subei fei-Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de fayu” [A provisional discussion of the
development of the abandoned Yellow River delta in northern Jiangsu], Dili xuebao 41.2 (1986), and
Xu Hailiang, “Huanghe xiayou-de duiji lishi he fazhan qushi” [The history and trends of development
of the sediments in the lower course of the Yellow River], Shuili xuebao 7 (1990).

The shifts in course, and in the hydraulic strategies adopted and discarded,
during the south-course period reveal the nature of the continuing battle.
They show how maintaining the viability of the Grand Canal, whose convoys
had to cross the Yellow River not far upstream from its mouth (see Map 1),
committed the Chinese state to a conﬂict with the river that it could not afford
to lose, and could only momentarily win. The Canal was the lifeline that made
it possible to maintain supplies to Beijing—the principal capital after 1420
under the Ming. What was intuited as politically and militarily necessary to
block non-Han invasions of the central Chinese plain from the north led to a
war with water instead. Since the capital was not expendable, this was another
form of lock-in.
The crossing required the grain boats to go along a short stretch of the
Yellow River between Huai'an and Xuzhou, famous for the dangers of its rockstudded rapids. The cost of keeping the junctions between the Canal and the

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

131

river functioning here was immense. In 1606, dredging and diking in the
Xuzhou area required half a million workers for ﬁve months, and the expenditure of 800,000 ounces of silver.35 The late nineteenth-century gazetteer for
Huai'an prefecture explains how the deposition of sediment on the river bed
made it harder for the junctions to work properly:36
When the transport route was ﬁrst opened [early in the ﬁfteenth century],
the Canal lay at a higher level than the Yellow River and the Huai River. Thus
it suffered relatively little damage. As the dikes along the Yellow River and
the adjacent lakes rose ever higher, the Canal sank ever relatively lower. Since
the middle of the Ming dynasty, disasters have been caused by reverse ﬂow
from the two rivers into the Canal such that there has been no year untroubled by clearing, dredging, building, and blocking off.
The knock-on effects from attempting to stabilize the Canal could destabilize
other hydrological systems. An example is the cutting of the Jia River in the
middle of the sixteenth century. The object was to allow the northbound boats
to cross the Yellow River more or less directly and so avoid the rapids. Here is
the president of the Ministry of Public Works surveying the terrain:37
He once again in person led the ofﬁcials responsible for the Yellow River,
climbing the plateaus and descending into the wetlands to calibrate the relative heights. . . . He came upon the place called Hanzhuang, where the
terrain becomes more and more marshy and it was possible to clear a way
through for the channel. He thereupon sank six well shafts in order to test
its ‘pulse’. When he had excavated to a depth of several feet there were small
stones and gravels, and a soil with a consistency like curds, that crumbled
when hoed. . . . “This,” he declared, “is suitable for a channel!”
Contrary to common impression, Confucian mandarins sometimes dirtied
their hands with practicalities. An ofﬁcial’s expertise in water control was a
source of respect.38
The problem with creating the Jia was the side effects. These are described in
the mid-nineteenth-century gazetteer for Peizhou (on the boundary between
the East and the Northeast):39
There is no stream greater than the Yellow River, and no ﬂooding greater
than that of the River Yi. The Yellow River now ﬂows along the old course
of the Si; and since the Si has thus been captured by the Yellow, the Yi has
not emptied out to the south. After the Jia Canal was opened, the streams of
Shandong province were all coerced toward the southeast. The Ying, the old
Jia, and the Yi were cut off at one and the same time. There is a multiplicity
of embankments and locks, and much troublesome concern with opening

132

Patterns

and shutting them. The water is blocked to the east and debarred to the
west, the pulses of the streams having been thrown into disorder.
Worse,
Lake Guan, four kilometers east of the present county capital, . . . and Lake
Lianwang near the mouth of the River Yi, as well as Lake Ge and Lake Wan
to the northeast, and Lake Zhou and Lake Liu to its east, are all ﬁlled in with
sediment as a result of these overﬂows from the rivers in Shandong. Furthermore, downstream from the River Zhi there are no banks or channels
surviving because of the inﬂow of silt-laden currents. It is for this reason
that the transport canal is a disease of our stomach and heart, while the
Yellow River is a robber in our gateyard. With regard to our stomach and
heart we are concerned about blockage by constipation, while with respect
our gateyard we are afﬂicted by lawlessness.
This was the environmental payment exacted for the convoys carrying
southern rice to the bureaucrats and soldiers in the north.
Why did the river shift south? The main events were as follows.40 The reader
without a historical atlas of China to hand should not be concerned at the cat’s
cradle of place-names. What matter are the broad patterns. These have been
highlighted by italics:
(1) In 1077 the Yellow River temporarily broke into two branches. One went
south of the Shandong peninsula (in the Northeast) along the so-called
Southern Qing River, which was the old course of the Si River, and shared a
mouth with the Huai (in the East). The other continued to go north along the
Northern Qing River, the old course of the Ji. The full northern course was
restored the following year, but this was the shape of events to come.
In 1168, the History of the Jin relates that “the River broke out at Li Gu’s Ford,
its waters invading the city of Caozhou [in the Northeast], and dividing its
course to ﬂow through the region of Shanxian [in southwest Shandong]. . . .
The Director of Waterways . . . further observed: ‘The new river’s waters have
taken sixty per cent and the old river’s waters forty per cent. If we now block off
the new river, the two rivers will again join together to form a single one’.”41
When this was done there was again a single course. Before long, though, the
Yellow River’s pressure on the state’s resources and manpower intensiﬁed to the
point that in 1193 the regional commandant observed: “The Great River in the
past had branch streams and debouchments off its southern bank. If it were
possible to lead it off in such a way that it spread out, this would be enough to
drain away the position-power of the water.”42 ‘Spreading out’ was one of the
standard recipes for controlling the river at this time. The chief problem that it

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

133

created in practice was that if the channels became wider relative to their depth,
the current would slow down, and drop a proportion of its sediment load.43
(2) In 1194 debates continued in the Jin government as to how best to subdivide the river while avoiding heavy expenses on hydraulic works, or damaging
cities and farmland that lay in the path of possible routes both north and
south, especially since their actual course could not be exactly determined
before the dikes were breached. The objective hoped for was to “nullify the
water’s position-power by means of subdivision.” In the fall of this year the
river broke out southward from north of Kaifeng (in the Northeast), and the
report of the Department of Affairs of State asserted that the regional
commandant and other ofﬁcials had taken “no care at all, but, since they saw
that the water was tending in a southerly direction, made no plans in advance
to deal with it.”44 In the event, the river was again divided between the same two
‘Qing’ rivers as before, but also used the Bian River for its southern route after
1351. In other words, its courses were now out of control. This continued
during the next phase.
(3) Only after the ﬂoods of 1391, did “the Yellow River in its entirety enter the
old course of the Huai,” which it reached via Xiangcheng45 and Shouzhou46
along the Ying River, with a lesser branch exiting to the sea via Xuzhou.47
(4) Between 1416 and 1448, the now dominant southern course took the bed of
the Guo River, but between 1448 and 1455 there was again a substantial
northern course, via the Northern Qing River, which was eventually closed off
by human intervention. A very limited control was momentarily returning.
(5) After the ﬂoods in the late 1480s and early 1490s, up to seventy per cent
of the water went north once more. In 1492 a decree directed an inspection to
be made:48
We have heard that the Yellow River, which passes through a wide expanse
of land in He'nan, Shandong, and North and South Zhili [modern Jiangsu],
moving its course in irregular fashion, has been a menace for a long time
past, and has recently grown signiﬁcantly worse. The general explanation
for this is that previously it ﬂowed southeast from Kaifeng into the River
Huai, but today its old course has silted up and become shallow, so that it
has gradually shifted north, joining with the Qin River,49 and its situation is
becoming more and more unmanageable.
Proposals were made at Court at this time to give up the effort to control the
Yellow River and to cease maintaining the Grand Canal, because of the expense
in money and manpower. It was argued that it was preferable to transport the

134

Patterns

state’s tax-grain by sea instead.50 The point to remember is that during this
period the greater part of the sediment carried by the Yellow River was still
being deposited on the plain through which it ran. It was only transported to
a limited degree all the way to the sea mouth.51
(6) In 1493 Liu Daxia, the ﬁrst of the river-tamers, rebuilt the system of dikes
in such a way that an exclusive southern course was assured after this date. This
increased the quantity of sediment coming down to the river mouth where
it formed ‘mounds’.52 In 1534, according to the then director-general of the
Yellow River,53
In times past the waters of the Huai ﬂowed into the sea on their own, and there
were also curved channels at the sea mouth, for the ﬂow upstream and
downstream of Andong. There were in addition the Jian River [which ﬂowed
past Huai'an and was at one time used for transport to Yancheng], and the
Maluo Creek, whereby the waters were divided and so entered the sea.
Today the Yellow River has joined with the Huai, and the position-power
of the water is not as it was before, with the Jian River, the Maluo Creek, and
all the curved channels at the sea mouth having become blocked up, so that
they are unable to drain the water swiftly. The way through downstream is
blocked, and there are ﬂoods upstream, which obstruct the grain transport to
the capital. The creeks should be dredged one after the other, and the sediment in the curved channels dealt with by installing numerous ‘dragon-claw
boats’ as dredgers to go backward and forward so as to scour and scrape,
and widen the way to the sea.54
In other words, Liu Daxia’s success was generating new problems.
(7) During the ﬁrst three-quarters of the sixteenth century, the Yellow River
took a multiplicity of paths across the Huai valley, often simultaneously. An
illustration of what was happening may be found in a passage quoted by the
great historical geographer Gu Zuyu with reference to events in 1558:55
The old south course of the Great River was from Xinji [in Guide prefecture
in the Northeast] . . . to Jimenji in Xiao county, from which it came out at
Xiaofu Bridge in Xuzhou [on the boundary of the East and Northeast]. This
was the old course of the river that was restored [in 134456] . . . , its conﬁguration being like that of an overturned jar ﬂowing easily from above to below.
Later, because the disasters caused by ﬂoods in He'nan had become a
matter of urgency, a separate lesser river was opened [in the late ﬁfteenth
century] with the intention of destroying the position-power of the water by
subdividing it. The river would not, however, follow two courses. The original main course became ever shallower and more obstructed. Over 125 kilo-

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

135

meters of it thus became silted up between Xinji and the Xiaofu Bridge. The
river ﬂowed north of the previous line . . . and further split into six branches
. . . all of which followed the course of the Grand Canal to the rapids at
Xuzhou. A further branch separated off from the town of Jiancheng . . . and
then split again into ﬁve small branches . . . and these likewise went from the
Xiaofu Bridge to join the Xuzhou rapids. The Yellow River was divided into
eleven streams and its position-power was weakened. When its positionpower had been weakened it deposited sediment on a vast scale, and the
breaches of dikes, and the ﬂoods, thus became even worse.
In 1565 there were said to be sixteen channels.57 One might almost talk of
‘Yellow Rivers’ in the plural at this time, at least in the lower reaches, and a river
of this sort can hardly be considered hydrologically the same as that which was
to emerge after the hydraulic transformation of 1578–9.
(8) After the mid sixteenth century, the sea mouths shared by the Yellow River
and the Huai became blocked by sediment. According to Wu Guifang, then in
charge of the imperial grain transport, “the general cause is that for many long
years the way through the branching creeks along the coast has been blocked
by dams. Entry to the sea relies wholly on the single route via Yunti [the
customs station on an island off the main mouth]. When the river reaches the
sea it is obstructed in a transverse fashion, and its entire current has become
an overﬂow of mud.”58 By 1578 the width of the central sea mouth had
narrowed from the 7 or 7.5 kilometers downstream of Yunti in early Ming to
from 3.5 to 4, or at most 5 kilometers.59
In 1577 Wu Guifang opposed proposals to divide the Huai and the Yellow
rivers and divert them into the Yangzi. He contrasted the earlier channel
pattern whereby the greater part of the Yellow River had joined the Huai in
mid-course with that of his own day where the two rivers only joined close to
the sea:
The Yellow River is laden with silt to an extreme degree. If the clear Huai is
not used to cleanse it, the sea mouth will be nothing but turbid mud. This
will inevitably cause a worsening of the blocking of the lower course.
Breaches of the dikes along the banks, and irruptions of water, will become
an ever more menacing threat . . . .
Since the Song and the Yuan dynasties, and down to the Zhengde reign of
our present dynasty [1506‒21], a period of almost ﬁve hundred years, the
Yellow River has entered the sea via the Huai without the sea mouth
becoming blocked up. When the Yellow River reached the province of
He'nan it joined with the Huai and they proceeded together, passing by
Ying, Shou, Feng, and Si to the Southern Qing River, and thus the clear

136

Patterns

water cleansed the turbid, and it was made possible for the muddy dregs not
to be deposited. So it was that for several hundred years there were no disasters [quite untrue]. The general explanation for this is that during this time
seventy per cent of the water of the Yellow River was passing by way of Ying
and Shou, and only thirty per cent by way of the branch stream that ﬂowed
via the Xiaofu Bridge in Xuzhou.
Recently, though, since some time in the Jiajing reign-period [1522‒66],
the ﬂow past the Xiaofu Bridge in Xuzhou has become insufﬁcient, and the
two sets of rapids, at Xuzhou and at Lü, have often dried up. Those in
authority have not set their minds upon the long view, but have struggled
to divert the Yellow River so that all of it ﬂows through Xuzhou and Peizhou
to the Southern Qing River.
For the ﬁrst time there has been no [mid-course] juncture with the Huai.
Thus the position-power of the Yellow River is now strong, but the ﬂow of
the Huai is weak, and its contribution to the cleansing process minimal.
Thus it is that the sea mouth is gradually growing higher, and every year the
threat of ﬂoods overﬂowing becomes more urgent . . . . If the ﬂow of the
Huai is now to be permanently cut off, and it is no longer to join with the
Yellow River, then only mud will ﬂow down, and day after day the deposition of sediment will increase. ‘The ocean will turn into mulberry ﬁelds’60
between Yunti, Cao Bay, Jincheng, and the mouth of the Guan. To an ever
increasing extent, the Yellow River will have nowhere to go.61
Concentrating the Yellow River into its Xuzhou branch, with the intention of
helping the imperial tribute-grain transport cross the river there, thus began
before the time of Pan Jixun’s work. The effects of this concentration were
already visible at the sea mouth, and understood as being such.
In fact, the Yellow River also had a number of smaller exits both to the north
and the south of the main mouth. Gu Yanwu, the great seventeenth-century
chronicler of regional diversities, quotes a source that describes how in recent
times the minor mouths on the southern side had become silted up as the result
of the tides washing back the sediment ﬂushed by the Yellow River into the sea:62
In the old days none of these supplementary sea mouths was silted up. That
they have silted up in recent times has been due to the yellow sediment . . . .
The general explanation is that the sea water is subject to tides twice a day
. . . . The sea water blocks the lake water for two double hours when it comes
in, so that the latter cannot ﬂow. This happens for eight hours during every
day. How can the yellow sediment fail to be deposited?
The supplementary sea mouths to the north were in the same situation, having
been “in recent days” blocked by the yellow sediment, and the main mouth

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

137

there had shrunk to half its former width. This source is not dated, but is probably from just before Pan Jixun’s main period of activity as it advocates the
view that “if the position-power of the waters of the Yellow River and the Huai
is not divided as they come south, but their strength is joined as they approach
the sea, then the new sediment will not remain and the old sediment will automatically be removed.”63 This was to be Pan’s mantra.
(9) Pan Jixun (1511–95), the greatest of the river-tamers, put this prescription
into practice.64 He set forth his basic hydrological views as follows:
When waters divide, then their position-power is weakened; and when their
position-power is weakened, the [suspended, saltating, and bedload] sediments
come to a standstill. When the sediments come to a standstill, then the river
becomes as it were bloated with food, with a foot or a few inches of water
passing above the surface of the deposited sediments. One only perceives
how high the channel bed has become.
When waters join, their position-power is ﬁerce, and when their positionpower is ﬁerce, then the sediments are scoured away. When the sediments are
scoured away, the river becomes deep, with fathoms of water passing above
the bed of the channel. One only perceives how low the channel bed has
become.
One builds dikes to conﬁne the water, and one uses the water to attack the
sediments. If the water does not precipitately overﬂow the two banks, then
it has to scour in a straight line along the bottom of the river. There is here
a ﬁxed pattern-principle and a position-power that is inexorable.
This is why joining the river channels surpasses dividing them.65
A new orthodoxy had been born. Although Pan’s views were not quantiﬁed,
they approximated to the modern theory whereby the capacity of water to
carry sediment is proportional to the fourth power of the speed of the current.
Sediment-carrying capacity is thus sensitive to small changes in velocity, and
velocity is sensitive to changes in the depth of the channel. Hydraulic engineering can make a major difference.
From 1578 to 1579 Pan restructured the lower Yellow River. In round
numbers, he built 1,200,000 million feet of earthen embankment, 30,000 feet
of stone embankment, stopped 139 breaches, constructed 4 stone spillways of
300 feet each, dredged 115,000 feet of river bed, planted 830,000 willow trees to
stabilize the tops of the dikes, drove in a large but unrecorded number of tree
trunks as pilings under the embankments, and spent almost 500,000 ounces of
silver and nearly 127,000 piculs of rice.66 He uniﬁed the channel of the Yellow
River and conﬁned it within so-called ‘thread dikes’ close to the banks, but

138

Patterns

backed these up in most places with ‘set-back dikes’ that were a kilometer or a
kilometer-and-a-half removed from the river. The purpose of these was to
contain any overﬂow that broke through or came over the top of the thread
dikes during the peak discharge period of the late summer and fall.67
One difﬁculty with this strategy was that the more rapid ﬂow of the Yellow
River past the junction with the Huai at Qingkou tended to block off the
weaker Huai, and even force reverse ﬂow up the latter, so causing siltation at
the junction of the two rivers. The traces of this, the so-called ‘threshold sediments’, are still visible today.68 The miscalculation was based on Pan’s belief
that, in the words of the Ming History, “if we can bring it about that the Yellow
River and the Huai exert their full strength, and that every drop of water goes
into the sea, then the force will be immense and concentrated. The accumulated sediments in the lower course will be automatically removed, and the sea
mouth will be opened without dredging.”69 More speciﬁcally,
The old sea mouth is all accumulated sediment, but although human power
is incapable of dredging it, the power of the water itself is capable of scouring
it away by impact. No pattern-principle in nature permits the sea to be
dredged. When, however, the river is led to make its way to the sea, then one
is using water to control water, in other words a strategy for indeed dredging
the sea.
Likewise the Yellow River cannot be led by human power. If, however, we
keep the dike defenses in good repair, so that there are no breaches of the
banks, then the water will pass through the midst of the land and the sediment will be removed by being entrained by the water. In other words, this is
indeed a strategy for leading the Yellow River.70
Conquering nature by obeying her, as Francis Bacon was to put it in the West
not long afterward.71 The perception was magniﬁcent; the details inadequately
thought through. The effect of the new strategy was to increase deposition at
the sea mouth, and reduce the gradient of the lower course.
(10) Flooding returned in a decade. In 1591 the capital city of Sizhou (on the
East–Northeast boundary) was inundated to a depth of three feet and it was said
that “ninety per cent of the inhabitants were drowned.”72 An ofﬁcial observer73
described the city wall in the ﬂoods as being “like a cup ﬂoating on the water,
the cup itself also being full.”74 He recommended that “clearing the sediment
accumulated at the sea mouth be made the ﬁrst priority.”75 Later he added that
“since there is no hope of dredging the sea-mouth sediment, the channel bed
grows higher every day; and, since the Yellow River constantly ﬂows in a reversed
direction, Qingkou becomes more obstructed by the day.” He suggested clearing

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

139

Qingkou and then dividing the Yellow River there, but rejoining the branches
lower down so that the water “strikes the sea with concentrated force.”76 The
debate over what to do about the sea mouth “growing ever more obstructed”
continued without interruption, some critics of Pan also pointing out that too
much constriction had in fact caused the ﬂooding. The majority were inclined
to revert to the policy of multiple channels.77
In 1593 the emperor put Yang Yikui in charge of hydraulic operations, and
during 1595–6 Yang basically implemented this majority view, which he had
himself contributed to forming. “The waters of the Yellow River were divided
and drained into the sea, in order to repress the power of the Yellow River.
Three-and-a-half kilometers of sediments were cleared at Qingkou, . . . and
the Huai was drained into the sea by three channels, and its branches diverted
into the Yangzi.”78 Yang’s efforts were moderately successful, but only in the
short run. Neither Pan’s concentration nor Yang’s division was in itself a
sufﬁcient ﬁx. The point to be noted, though, is that we now have a man-made
hydraulic explanation for the sixteenth-century changes in the pattern of the
growth of the Yellow River delta shown in the two tables.
(11) The next surge in the rate of advance of the delta, and of sediment accretion, was from 1701 to 1747 (as shown in Table 3). It was slighter than that associated with Pan Jixun’s hydraulic policies, being almost twenty-one per cent of
the 1579–91 rate of advance and twenty per cent of the rate of accretion. There
is a possible connection here with the shift in hydraulic policies effected by Jin
Fu, another celebrated river-tamer who was in charge of the Yellow River
almost continuously from 1677 until his death in 1692.79 Jin broadly agreed with
Pan’s ideas,80 and he built an earthen extension to the levees along the lower
course of the river downstream of Yunti Guan for about 180,000 feet or 64.5
kilometers,81 in order to concentrate the ﬂow, and so scour away the accumulated sediment. Thereafter, it was said, “the water was constricted within the
levees, being swift all the way, and having the force to scour the sediment. The
undesirable accumulation of silt in the sea mouth was removed and a sink for
drainage thereupon cleared.”82 The date of this must have been before 1690 by
which time the divided lower course had been uniﬁed again and was cutting a
wider and deeper channel.83
The lower course of the Yellow River had silted up rapidly during the third
quarter of the seventeenth century.84 This may have been due to several causes:
the alleged cutting of dikes by the rebels in the last years of the Ming dynasty,85
the Ming government’s breaching of dikes to drown the rebels,86 and what
Jin Fu called the “division of drainage” caused by ﬂoods such as those of
1676 that were unable to reach the sea.87 By this latter date “only a thread” of

140

Patterns

the main course through the sea mouth remained. “In addition,” he noted,
“coarse grasses and thickets of reeds intertwine there, and are not something
to which human strength can usefully be applied.”88 The deposits also hardened with time:89
There is a difference between old and new deposits of sediment. In the
case of those newly deposited within the last three years, although their
outside is as hard as a board, the sediment inside has not yet dried out
and it is easy to scour them by means of the impact of water. Before ﬁve
years have elapsed, though, the sediment inside will have become dried
into a clod of board-like sediment, and scour by impact will have become
very difﬁcult.
Besides building constricting earthen levees, Jin Fu increased the height of the
barrage and the embankment that retained the Hongze Lake upstream on the
Huai and before its conﬂuence with the Yellow River. This was “to assist in the
storage of water that may be used to have an impact on the sea mouth when
released.”90 He also cut a large dry channel in the dried-up sediment of the
main course—which latter he described as now being “299 parts out of 300 of
the former exit to the sea.” This was aligned close enough to the remaining
trickle of current so that when the peak discharge was directed into it the
boundary layer between the two would collapse, making a single enlarged
course.91 After difﬁculties with ﬂoods that occurred before the planned
scouring was complete,92 the scheme seems to have been successful in
achieving this limited objective.
Important events took place in the remaining century and a half of the
southern phase. Some of them have been studied, while others still await
examination. Jane Leonard has, for example, described the “growing ecological
degradation” of the Grand Canal by 1824–6, and linked it with the collapse of
the dike that contained the Hongze Lake. Manipulating the lake was critical in
getting the grain-transport ships across the Yellow River without an inﬂux of
river water carrying a heavy load of sediment impairing the canal. The crisis
had to be met in 1825 by the costly use of transshipment into vessels with a
shallower draught than that of the standard ships. The following year required
the temporary use of private sea-transport from Shanghai to Tianjin, made
possible by offering generous terms to leading merchants based in the lower
Yangzi valley, whose skills and assets were indispensable.93
Essentially, though, over the long run, premodern techniques, however
good, could not contend with a rise in the level of the mouth of the great river
by almost ten meters (Table 3). In 1855 the Yellow River switched back to a
northern course.94

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

141

The Hangzhou Bay seawall
Pan Jixun’s concentration of the lower reaches of the southern-course Yellow
River in the later sixteenth century may have been the single engineering work
that had the greatest environmental impact at any time anywhere in the
premodern world. If we turn to a program of engineering and maintenance
sustained over the centuries, the seawall that protected the coastline south of
the Yangzi down to the southern side of Hangzhou Bay (in the East) from at
least Tang times onward must outrank it. The shelter it gave made possible the
creation of what has been described earlier as a Chinese Netherlands. A world
of thinly populated saline marshes and creeks invaded by the sea was turned
into a level land of drained polders and canals, where the density of the inhabitants was among the highest anywhere before the twentieth century. Both the
‘Chinese Netherlands’ and their European counterpart were of roughly the
same size, 40,000 square kilometers in the roundest of round ﬁgures. If we also
include the section of seawall north of the Yangzi, then the Chinese area was
considerably bigger.
The challenge and inspiration presented by nature were of course different
in the two cases. Thus the wetlands of the original Yangzi delta had no feature
comparable to the elongated ridges of sand and grass that guarded, and still
guard, most of the coast of the Netherlands west of Amsterdam, a natural
defense that has only needed ﬁlling in, extension in the north, and strengthening with inner lines as reinsurance. (The mounds of shells mentioned in the
next chapter, on page 175, are the nearest parallel.) The two also present many
differences in appearance. In particular, the Dutch water-systems, unlike the
Chinese, are not primarily designed to provide for irrigated farming.
There is only space to describe a part of the epic battle that was waged here
against the East China Sea, so I will focus on the inner part of Hangzhou Bay,
where over a millennium or more the coastline was almost totally reshaped,
partly by natural forces and partly by the indirect results of human actions.
The outline of the story is freeze-framed by Maps 3, 4, and 5.
Map 3 shows the bay as it was a thousand years ago, a funnel-shaped macrotidal estuary with a celebrated tidal bore that swept in along the south shore
from the east and passed below Hangzhou city. Two expanses of pastures and
salterns form the northern shore, anchored on Zheshan, the ‘ocher-red mountain’ which faces Kanshan, ‘idol-alcove mountain’, across the narrowest part of
the strait to its south. A seawall, already some centuries old, guards the
southern coast, and a triple arc of dikes linking mounts Hezhuang, Yanmen,
Shu, and the Lesser Jianshan, up to more than ten kilometers inland from the
sea, provides the reserve lines of defense for the cities and farms.

Map 3 (above) Hangzhou Bay, circa 1000

Map 4 (facing page, top) Hangzhou Bay, mid eighteenth century
Map 5 (facing page, below) Hangzhou Bay, 1986

144

Patterns

Fast forward more than ﬁve hundred years. Map 4 shows the bay in the
middle of the eighteenth century. The sea has engulfed the northern pastures
and salterns, driving the coast back to a vulnerable line of seawall with no
natural anchorage between the Lesser Jianshan and the city of Hangzhou. This
defense is vital for the protection of the ﬁrst leg of the Grand Canal which can
be seen on the map going north from the great city. The city of Yan'guan is
now on the coast. The tide enters mainly through the northern strait, and the
mountains that once studded the tongue of land descending from the north
have switched to being eminences in an emerging tongue that is growing up
from the south composed of a mass of newly deposited or transported sediments. The southern strait has choked up.
Another two hundred years takes us to Map 5 and the present day. Unlike
the two previous maps, this is based on a satellite image, taken in 1986. The
southern tongue, known as the ‘Southern Sediments’, has been consolidated.
The western part of the inner bay has been ﬁlled in, the river reduced to a
channel whose sand bars are in constant motion (though this cannot be
shown in a single map). The residues of parts of earlier shorelines show some
of the steps in the process of inﬁll. The original southern seawall has been lost
to sight inland. The old central cleft has ﬁlled in. The channels to the east and
west of the city of Shaoxing that spread out like a dragonﬂy’s wings are the
remnants of Mirror Lake, a famous source of irrigation water until the early
Song, but for almost a millennium now only an anthropogenic scar on the
plain. Silted up, like most shallow lakes in this part of the world. Only the
familiar mid-bay mountains, up which one can still clamber, and stand and
survey the scene around, have survived the passing of the centuries. The water,
it should be added, is now gray and polluted with progress, and birds, apart
from the egrets and gulls, few and far between.
How did this transformation happen? How far was it man-made? The story
told here by way of a response is the most complex in the book, but the
complexity is of the essence. The brief answer to the second question is, ‘To a
signiﬁcant degree’. The longer (but still incomplete) answer is more difﬁcult.
The dominant pattern of runoff is from the hills on the south side of the
bay. This water feeds not only the Qiantang River but also other lesser but still
important rivers. These include the Puyang which today ﬂows in a northwesterly direction into the Qiantang a little distance upstream from Hangzhou city
(coming in from the other side). Immediately before the mid-ﬁfteenth century
it took a more northerly course directly into the Bay, well downstream of the
city. There was also the Cao'e River, which enters the bay east of the Southern
Sediments from the southeast. Smaller streams off the hills fed the elongated
man-made Mirror Lake which lay for a millennium from the Later Han on the

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

145

east and west sides of Shaoxing just south of a slightly later transport canal,95
that was built because sailing in the inner bay was so dangerous. The patches
of the lake that remain today are shallow reaches full of staked-out expanses of
cultivated water plants, dotted with ﬁshing nets, and overhung with clusters of
willow trees. Five hundred years ago, all three of the major rivers entered the
bay where only the mouth of the Cao'e now survives (Maps 3 and 4). The point
of conﬂuence was and still is known as ‘Three Rivers’ Mouth’, a name that
today only makes sense in the light of its geographical history.
The present coastline is enclosed within seawalls. The traces of parts of
earlier seawalls may sometimes be identiﬁed lying inland. They have often
been built outward sequentially, spreading like the growth rings of a tree.
Others have long since sunk out of sight under the waves and tides. Two thousand years ago the coast was mostly salt marshes and tidal ﬂats, probably
fringed, as it still is in places, with stands of the club-rush Scirpus xmarigueter
in the upper part of the intertidal zone, where they damp the waves, and
increase the deposition of sediment and the build-up of organic matter. They
are succeeded, after a transitional zone, by narrower bands of the reed Phragmites australis, a plant that has a number of economic uses, such as material
for the manufacture of paper, and has hence to some degree been planted
deliberately. The Phragmites zone is also used for grazing cattle and sheep, and
most likely was so in historical times.
The total inﬂux of seaborne sediments brought down the coast from the
mouth of the Yangzi River to the north amounts to about 4.66 ǂ 107—that is,
close to forty-seven million—tonnes per year. This massive supply of sediments
from the sea is unusual. The Qiantang River, which has a catchment area of
49,000 square kilometers, discharges 6.68 ǂ 106—about six and two-thirds of
a million—tonnes per year of sediment as measured at Lucibu, where the tides
become insigniﬁcant. Total sediment inﬂux into the bay is thus 5.328 ǂ 107
tonnes per year.96 The tidal bore today forms near the Greater and Lesser
Jianshan, and recent measurements indicate a speed of from 4.8 to 9.6 meters
per second.97
The long-term changes are summarized in the Complete Documents relating
to the Affairs of the Lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth compiled around 1702 by Cheng
Mingjiu:98
The overall pattern is that the water from the upper reaches of the Qiantang
River ﬂows out through one of three clefts. There is a large cleft to the south
and to the north, and a small central cleft in the middle between them.
When the water makes its exit through one of these clefts, the other two are
both silted up. They have opened in sequence, changing around among
themselves.99 The time during which water is passing out through one of

146

Patterns

them may be several hundreds of years or less than a hundred, but is not to
be reckoned in years and months.
If we speak with respect to the Song dynasty, then in 1094 the water went
out through the large southern cleft [implying, but not stating, that it had
taken a different route previously]. More than ﬁve hundred years later, in
1620, it went out via the small central cleft, but in less than a century this was
silted up, and the cottages, graves, ﬁelds, and gardens of the large northern
cleft were all given over to the ﬂow of the river. During 1692 and 1693 the
current was still slight, but on 2 August 1695 it broke through in tumultuous
fashion and became a large river. The sands in such places as Guali and
Jiudun on the border between the counties of Xiaoshan and Shanyin forthwith lay exposed to the air. In the fall of 1693, for no reason, they collapsed
totally without trace. Fortunately the sands in such places as Dongtang Bay
[seaward of the Lock] were actually extended, and the people could not
contain their delight. I have heard, however, from those living along the sea
coast that they did not consider this to be a cause for rejoicing, but as something deserving profound anxiety.
The inner bay was unstable.
It may have been even more so in earlier times. Su Dongpo, who served in
the eleventh century as the subprefect of Hangzhou, wrote:100
The tide comes in from the east of the sea gate with the force of a thunderstorm, but there are shifting hills rising up in the midst of the river and
facing the hills of Fisherman’s Inlet [south of Xiaoshan and approximately
opposite Hangzhou], and interlocking like dog’s teeth. So it is that one sees
the waters of the tide swirling in eddies there, and striking against them
with redoubled fury. The silt shoals shift around, assuming the forms of
demons and spirits, often surging forth from the deep pools to form
mounds that run for more than ﬁfty kilometers and then vanish again
between sunrise and sunset. Even the captains of boats and ﬁshermen are
unable to be certain where the deeps and the shallows are.
In similar fashion, Qian Weishan, a native of Hangzhou, wrote in the middle
of the fourteenth century that101
A hilly eyot shifts about in the river, appearing to be a stable rock. When the
incoming tide leaves the sea gate behind,102 it divides in the middle into two
branch-streams, the eastern one of which goes along the shores of Shaoxing
towards the Qiantang River [above Hangzhou], and the western one of
which strikes straight against this eyot with furious onslaught, and then
withdraws. It is called the ‘tide that turns its head around’.

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

147

This feature is not mentioned at later dates. It seems there may have been pressure at this time against the northern bank of the river, which then ran from
Hangzhou city to Mount Zhe (Map 3), but across which the river now ﬂows on
its way to the bay.
In looking at the possible causes of coastal change, we need to distinguish
between long-term changes that were under way before the period of extensive
building of seawalls and those, rather later, that could have been inﬂuenced by
human hydraulic activities. We begin by looking at the ﬁrst of these processes.
The prelude was that the salient on the northeast coast of the outer bay that
over 1,500 years ago linked the mainland to the Wangpanshan, today a group of
islands about twenty kilometers offshore from Zhapu (off Maps 3 and 4 to the
northeast), was scoured away before Song times.103 This opened the north coast
of the inner bay to more direct attack from the tides. Morita Akira’s study on
the hydraulic organization for seawalls in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces104 also
shows that one of the reasons for the building of the seawalls that run down the
coast of southern Jiangsu and northern Zhejiang provinces was to protect the
inhabitants of these coasts from the incursions of high tides, which appear to
have become a more serious problem in the Southern Song dynasty, in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, for reasons perhaps connected with colder and
less stable climatic conditions in the world generally.105 These were changes
outside human control, though the second brought a human response.
It is clear that the northern shore was under attack from at least the early
twelfth century. According to an ofﬁcial writing in 1116, “in recent years the
hydrological circumstances have changed somewhat. From passing out to the
sea by Mount Zhe, the water has turned and gathered at Yanmen and Baishi in
the area along the northern bank. The damage done to the commoners’ farmland and to the salterns extends ﬁfteen kilometers from east to west and more
than ten kilometers from south to north.” In 1117 the prefect of Hangzhou
observed that “the towns of Tangcun, and Yanmen, and Baishi lie alongside the
Qiantang River as it makes its way out to the great sea. Day and night the two
tides have little by little gnawed them away and encroached inland.”106 This
situation worsened after the end of the fourteenth century:107
On its southern side, Changle district is close to the Qiantang River, and
from the closing years of the Hongwu reign-period [about 1390] until 1409
in the Yongle reign-period it was smitten by the river and the tides. The
diked banks were broken down. . . . In the ﬁfth lunar month of 1414
Heaven–Nature unloosed torrential rains and merciless winds. The lightning-swift river and the tides overwhelmed the level land, the deep water
reaching more than ﬁve kilometers from south to north and over twentyﬁve kilometers from east to west. . . . Many of the inhabitants were

148

Patterns

drowned. There were countless deaths, and the survivors ﬂed. Dwellings
were swept away without trace. Farmland was totally submerged.
The Minor Central Cleft and the approach to the Major Northern Cleft were
thus being opened, by a curl-round effect, from the landward side at this time.
On the seaward side the low-lying ﬂats along the north coast of the outer
bay were the ﬁrst to be stripped away. A Song-dynasty gazetteer records loss of
land southeast of Haiyan (off the maps to the northeast), including irrigation
systems, “now all submerged in the sea.”108 This may have further removed the
outer defenses of the northern coast of the inner bay. A benchmark for the
inner bay is provided by the record that when the seawall for Yan'guan
(Haining) was rebuilt in 721 it was at that time ﬁfteen kilometers south of the
city, which today is on the sea coast, and the sea was a further ﬁve kilometers
south of the seawall.109 Some erosion was noticed in 1122,110 but the real assault
began early in the thirteenth century:111
In 1219 the sea at Yan'guan forsook its ancient course, and the tides rushed
in across more than ten kilometers of level land, reaching in their incursions
as far in as the county capital. The creek at Luzhougang, and a number of
salterns . . . were all destroyed. Mount Shu [Shushan on Map 3] was
engulfed in the sea. Almost half of the dwellings and farmlands were lost.
The salt water reached four prefectures. The prefects of that time reported
that, “Last year the waters of the sea rose suddenly, and rushed in across the
sandy shores, each breakthrough carrying them in a few tens of feet further,
for day after day. . . . The might of the tides presses in on the inhabitants. If
the spring tides should irrupt with angrily bubbling waves, and a typhoon
to back them, inspiring a convulsion of nature, it is all but inevitable that for
ﬁfty kilometers the common folk will be buried in the guts of ﬁshes.”112
In 1222, when the tides broke in again, the intendant of Zhexi113 told the
emperor that the threat was to the whole area to the east and south of Lake Tai
(off the maps to the northwest), which might be rendered uncultivable by
salinization if nothing were done.114
The overall pattern during the Yuan and Ming can be summarized by
quoting Chen Shan’s Discussion of Seawalls, written early in the seventeenth
century:115
The county capital of Haining [Yan'guan] borders the sea on its southern
side. . . . The seawall is only a hundred paces away from the city wall. Eastward it goes as far as Haiyan, and westward to the Qiantang River, stretching
north to south for ﬁfty kilometers. To the southwest of this seawall is Mount
Zhe, which faces Mount Kan to the south. These mountains [Zheshan and

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

149

Kanshan in Maps 3 and 4] enclose the sea gate between them, where the
tides enter the river’s mouth.
Theorists aver that the sea is clear when out in the vastness of the ocean,116
but that when it arrives here it is constricted so that it cannot do as it will. It
forthwith turns back eastward in anger, reversing its direction of circulation.
There is also Mount Shidun [just east of Haining city] to obstruct it, so that
it becomes still more enraged and thereupon strikes in unstable fashion both
east and west. The damage that this does is concentrated on Haining.
I would observe that, according to the old gazetteer, there were more than
ten kilometers of sediment-ﬁelds outside the seawall, and that on the landward side of these sediment-ﬁelds there were more than 1120 to 1190
hectares117 of farmland, pastures, and orchards of mulberries, silk-thorns,
and jujubes. {So long as there was this external protection for the seawall,
the tides could not impact on it and wash it away, and there was every assurance that what was on the landward side of the stone seawall could endure.
Today, the sediment-ﬁelds and pastures have been entirely swept away by
the sea. The protecting sands have totally disappeared. Life depends solely
upon this girdle of newly constructed seawall.
I shall not record the constructions and destructions of the seawall since
Song and Yuan times},118 but from the Hongwu reign-period [1368–99] to
the Wanli reign-period [1573–1619], the sea has changed on ﬁve occasions, and
the wall has been rebuilt ﬁve times.
One source suggests that the mouths of the Qiantang were becoming
blocked as early as the beginning of the ﬁfteenth century. In 1420 an ofﬁcial
from the Memorials Ofﬁce reported that, “in the past there were seaways at
Mount Zhe and Mount Yanmen, but today both are closed by sediment, and
so the behavior of the tides has become still ﬁercer.”119 In spite of this, it does
not seem likely that the Northern Major Cleft was already being used by this
time. Evidence that it was not is provided by a letter written some time in the
seventeenth century by a native of Haining (Yan'guan):120
The sea at our county of Haining is no more than an arm of the great ocean,
but, when the tides strike and the sands are gnawed away, one at once sees
people’s ﬁelds and their houses being submerged. . . . To the west, mounts
Kan and Zhe face each other south and north, enclosing the sea gate
between them, the mouth where the sea enters the river. To the east are
Mount Shidun and the Greater and Lesser Jian hills rising up unexpectedly
in a corner of the sea, and forming the entranceway through which the sea
comes into Haining. The tide rises in the east and passes Zhapu and Ganpu,
being conﬁned within the ‘Eight Mountains of the Nearby Sea’.121

150

Patterns

The Qiantang River drains out to the west of its conﬂuence with the
Puyang River.122 It passes the Yan Foreshores123 and so exits into the sea. The
Yan Cleft is constricted between the space of the sea gate between mounts
Kan and Zhe. The entrance is exceedingly narrow, and of such a nature as to
compel the waves to strike against each other. Since the waves have come from
far away, they inevitably grow tumultuous and angry. For this reason they
strike about in swirling fashion, with a dashing noise, and there is the
menace of their bursting through the seawall . . . .
The county capital is bounded by a seawall a hundred paces to its south
. . . . The section of more than ten kilometers near the city is locked by the
two Jian hills at the east, and secured by Mount Zhe at the west, making
an embracing arc whose ends protrude out into the sea. The county
capital is to the north of these two mountains, the three of them constituting a pattern like a tripod vessel that is struck at an oblique angle by the
water. The area outside the city wall has become a headland-enclosed bay
for the sea.
When the tide rushes into the Yan Cleft it is held fast by the outﬂow of the
river, which it strikes against and then returns north. These more than ten
kilometers are attacked from three sides, and so it is that we constantly see
the seawall being broken down here.
The geometry was generating is own destruction.
There was, however, a period of about ﬁfty years in the middle of the seventeenth century during which the pressure on the northern seawall eased.
According to the county gazetteer for Haining:124
After the seawall of Haining county was rebuilt in 1664, the area outside it
was covered with protective sands that piled up for more than ten kilometers. The local people built shacks on them, to the extent of several hundreds
of families. This settlement was called ‘The Village Without A Name’. Near
to the dike the sand gradually became less saline and cotton was cultivated.
On the new sands along the sea shore they reduced brine by evaporation
and boiled it to make salt. People garnered these proﬁts without any longer
being aware of the menace presented by the sea. In this year [1715] the winddriven tides suddenly irrupted, and the seawall was smashed through.
Then instability returned:
From 1720 to 1721 the protective sands were demolished each day by a
hundred feet or more, even by several hundreds. . . . After 1724 the tides
struck northward every day. The protective sands were swept away without
a remnant left. The dike was repeatedly rebuilt and repeatedly broken.

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

151

In 1720 the governor of Zhejiang125 reported to the emperor that, “recently,
on account of the blockage caused by the deposition of silt, the river water and
the tides have been made to move entirely to the northern bank.”126 This
sounds like a decisive shift, but in fact there followed two decades of efforts to
redirect both river and tides back to the Minor Central Cleft, especially by
dredging. In 1733, some time after an earlier effort at clearing the central
channel started by the governor had been abandoned, the Yongzheng Emperor
observed that:127
If we dredge an induction channel in the Minor Central Cleft in addition to
the other measures proposed, and thus divide the ﬂow of the Qiantang River
into the sea, so as to reduce the force of the water, it would seem that this
would also offer advantages.
This personal interest in the hydraulic details was shared by his successor, the
Qianlong Emperor. In 1762 the latter wrote that “in recent years the pattern
imposed by the tides has been gradually pressing into the Major Northern
Cleft,”128 and it is clear that during the middle of the century there was a period
during which the ﬂows moved about considerably. Later in the same year
Qianlong wrote a summary history of these changes, much of it based on his
own observations:129
After 1745, and prior to 1757, the sea went through the Central Cleft. The
people of Zhejiang remarked that this was most fortunate and something
exceedingly hard to obtain. I made visits on two occasions in 1757 to observe
it, and to offer my congratulations on this good fortune to the God of the
Sea. I did not dare to be certain, however, that this situation would last.
Not long afterward, in the fall of 1758, there were scars in the sediment130
piled up on the northern headland of Mount Lei [Leishan];131 and in the
spring of 1759 the tides pressed exclusively through the Northern Major
Cleft. The protective sands along the northern shore were little by little
scoured away. These had been the defense both for the seawall of wooden
billets and the stone seawall. At this moment it was no longer possible to
delay the conversion of the section of the wall that was made of wooden
billets to stone.
The main channel seems to have oscillated between north and south up to 1765,
but by 1780 or thereabouts it had settled into essentially the modern pattern.132
The present-day course of the lower Qiantang River is thus only a little more
than two hundred years old. That its earlier pattern is wrongly shown in
almost every published Western historical map, and all but a handful of
Chinese ones, is a minor matter. What is important is, that in spite of serious

152

Patterns

efforts at engineering in the eighteenth century, the changes that have been
described above were predominantly the work of natural forces outside
human control.
The deposition of sediment was another matter.
As has been already noted above, the massive supply of sediments from the
sea into a bay is unusual. Approximate overall equilibrium requires that the
discharge from the river should scour away any residual quantity representing
the difference between what is brought in by the rising tide and what is taken
out by the predominantly slightly less rapidly moving ebb. Otherwise the
estuary would ﬁll up and vanish, or the deposited sediments be displaced
offshore. Evidence collected since 1915 indicates that, when the riverine ﬂow is
below 2000 cubic meters per second, tide-driven deposition dominates, and
that when it is greater than 8000 cubic meters per second, river-driven
scouring of the channel prevails, with an unstable equilibrium at intermediate
values. The reason that the ﬂow of the river is crucial is because, under appropriate conditions, it can reverse the difference between the normally greater
sediment-carrying competence of the incoming tide as compared to that of
the more slowly moving ebb.
Since the period of heaviest rainfall is between May and August, discharge
reaches its maximum in July and August, and falls to its minimum in
November and December.133 At Haining (historically Yan'guan) characteristic
values for sediment brought in and sediment removed in one semidaily cycle
of the tide (season not speciﬁed) have been measured as, respectively, 1.8 ǂ 106
tonnes and 0.85 ǂ 106 tonnes. The sensitivity of the balance of forces between
the river and the tide is apparent from Table 4, which shows the values at
Qibao Station, which is about thirty-nine kilometers upriver from Haining.
In years of low rainfall the bar of sediment in the bay builds up, while it
decreases in height during years of heavy rainfall. Thus, after increasing during
the dry period through 1951 and 1952, and the only moderate rains of 1952, it
had reached a maximum at Zhakou in 1953 of twenty-six meters. The scouring
due to the heavy rains of 1954 reduced its maximum height in the year by
almost two meters. For the historical period, rainfall in the Lake Tai area was
relatively low in the periods 1504–59 and 1636–1723, and relatively high in the
periods 1288–1378 and 1449–1518.134
Given this basic understanding of the processes at work, it seems reasonable
to suppose that human alteration of the river ﬂow around the bay in historic
times had some signiﬁcant effect on the pattern of sediment deposition. More
speciﬁcally, closing off the coast with a seawall, and regulating the outﬂow of
major rivers with locks, so that periods of peak discharge disappeared, caused
a net deposition of sediments. The timing ﬁts. The south shore of the bay was

153

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

Table 4 Riverine and tidal ﬂows, with related sediment transport, in the
Qiantang River measured at Qibao Station
River
discharge*
Low
232
High
6030

Direction
of tide
(m3/sec )

Velocity of
tide
(m/sec)

Volume of
tide
(106 ǂ m3)

Sediment
transported
(103 tonnes)

Sediment
Density
(kg/m3)

In
Out

+0.80
–0.63

106
105

+582
–203

5.49
1.93

In
Out

+0.49
–1.11

24.7
259

+47.1
–719

1.95
2.78

* Annual mean: 988 m3/sec.
Source: Qian Ning, Xie Hanxiang, Zhou Zhide, and Li Guangbing, “Qiantang-jiang hekou shakan-de
jindai guocheng” [Fluvial processes in recent times of the sand bar at the mouth of the Qiantang River
{authors’ own translation}], Dili xuebao 30.2 (June 1964). Last column calculated by M. Elvin and N.
Su, “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic factors in the changing morphology of
Harngzhou Bay, circa 1000–1800,” Environment and History 1.1. (Feb. 1995).

already enclosed by a seawall over two hundred and ﬁfty kilometers long in
Tang times, and for the period that concerns us, the section of some 61,600 feet
protecting the area that is now Shaoxing prefecture was built twenty kilometers north of the prefectural capital in the early thirteenth century, replacing
the earlier Tang wall. By Ming times about one-third of it was faced with
stone.135 The purpose of the wall was mainly “to keep the fresh water in and to
irrigate the ﬁelds.”136
A small-scale example of the causal mechanism being suggested is given in
the Wanli reign-period gazetteer for Shaoxing prefecture:137
In 1457 the prefect Peng Yi had the White Horse Mountain Lock built in
order to block off the tides at Three Rivers’ Mouth.138 Eastward of the lock
[the seaward side] it all silted up and became farmland. After this the river’s
water was no longer in direct contact with the sea.
White Horse Mountain Lock did not last long, however, being derelict by the
seventeenth century.139 Another illustration of the effect is that the alteration of
the course of the Puyang River between 1457 and 1464, so that most of it
emptied into the Qiantang upstream of Hangzhou, is said to have increased
the scour below Wenjiayan, and thus made the upper end of the bar in the bay
retreat seawards.140 Another passage that may refer to the effects of installing
locks or sluices on the rivers emptying into the sea gate off the mountains of
the south side is quoted in the Haining county gazetteer as a note to an entry
dated 1500:141

154

Patterns

The streams142 have all thrown out sand bars like obstructing walls. Thus the
river mouth has become constricted and the tides constrained so that they
strike when reﬂected against the concave shore of Yan'guan [Haining].
We can provisionally take this as pointing to the reduction in the sedimentcarrying competence of the streams discharging into the southern sea-gate
channel, slowed down because of sluice and lock construction. Finally, in more
general terms, since the larger rivers that were blocked in this way, above all the
Puyang and related streams, were on the south side of the bay, it is here that
the effect should have been most pronounced. It was.
When we turn up the focus it becomes clear that the seawall was only the
ﬁnal control mechanism in the irrigation system created for the Shaoxing
plain to the south of it. This had been advancing slowly northward from the
alluvial fans at the foot of the mountains for more than a millennium as the
tidal wetlands below were reclaimed for farming, and reducing peak discharge.
A historical overview of this process is given by one Ma Yaoxiang, writing at an
unknown date but before the middle of the seventeenth century:143
The water sources of Shaoxing ﬂow from the southwest to the northeast. In
ancient times they were in direct communication with the sea. The inrush and
the drainage were not regulated, which harmed the common folk. After
Later Han times, when Ma Zhen had built Mirror Lake to receive the water
off the mountains, sluice-gates were installed along the dikes, being opened
and shut at the appropriate seasons. When water was in short supply they
drained the lake to irrigate the ﬁelds. When water was plentiful they closed
the lake and drained water from the ﬁelds into the sea. . . .
Later they also built the seawall and opened Jade Hill Sluice [the principal
control-point for water from the south entering the Qianqing River, about
sixteen to seventeen kilometers north of Shaoxing city and Mirror Lake].
After this the embankments of the lake slowly fell into disrepair. Though there
were proposals in the Song dynasty to restore the lake, it had by this time
become unnecessary. The reason for this was that the waters ﬂowing into
Shaoxing by diverse channels were several tens in number. . . .
One may say that those ﬁelds that lie along the feet of the mountains are
watered by their springs, while those that border the sea are supplied by the
streams that branch from the former. These latter, having obtained what the
former has accumulated for them, are also spared the disasters [i.e., spate
ﬂooding] that afﬂict the former, both of these beneﬁts depending on the
seawall along Hangzhou Bay, which both stores the water and discharges it.
For this reason, when previously, under the Han, there was no seawall, it
was essential to build Mirror Lake [as a reservoir for fresh water]. In these

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

155

later times when, since the Song, there has been no Mirror Lake, keeping the
seawall in good repair has been essential.
Hydrological instability then struck in its usual fashion. The loss of Mirror
Lake, through the deposition of sediment and the reclamation of its area as
ﬁelds by powerful local farmers, led to increased ﬂooding in the plain below
as the seawall stopped the water easily escaping to the sea. This was
intensiﬁed by changes in the pattern of ﬂow of the Puyang River, which was
also known as the ‘Wan’ in its upper course, and as both the ‘Qianqing’ and
the ‘Xixiao’, or ‘West Small River’, in its lower course. This river came north at
this time and then, turning northeast, ﬂowed across the lower plain in an
approximately west-to-east alignment. Ma Yaoxiang describes what had
happened when the lower Puyang had shifted to this course from an earlier
one apparently not greatly different from the northwestern route that it
follows, again, today as shown in Map 5, (though it would have had at this
time to have circumvented an intervening mountain that was cut through in
the ﬁfteenth century):
There was a further cause for anxiety. All the water of the lakes of the counties of Puyang144 and Jiyang145 used to ﬂow into the Jiyang [Puyang] River,
then turn northwest and enter the Qiantang. Its conﬁguration was curvilinear and it could not go straight to its destination.146 Later it passed
through Fisherman’s Inlet and entered the Qianqing River [i.e. going north
and then east]. To the north it went out of White Horse Mountain and other
locks, and so entered the sea.
Today, however, these locks have also silted up. The water has no through
passage. Once there are ﬂoods, it has to ﬂow eastward and make Shaoxing
its sinkhole. Although there is the Jade Hill Sluice [North of Shaoxing,
South of Ma'anshan], this is not adequate to discharge water moving westto-east with such force. Every time this happens, people break open the dikes.
Though some limited relief is thereby obtained from the emergency, they
are obliged at once to repair the dikes of these inlets so that they are ready to
store water again. This, too, is work that is hard to accomplish.
Technological lock-in again, though in this case the problem was eventually
solved. Once a community is committed to a system of this sort, it has no easy
option—barring a new technological ﬁx—but to allocate labor and resources
to maintaining it. If costs start to rise, then tough.
The county gazetteer for Shanyin, the western part of Shaoxing, emphasized
this problem, while hinting at the extent to which the rivers had by now been
separated from the sea:147

156

Patterns

After Mirror Lake had been done away with, and made into farmland,
whenever the springs in the hills above it overﬂowed, there was nowhere for
the water to be stored. It was joined by the water of the Wan River [i.e., the
Puyang], which poured into the West Small River [the ‘old Puyang’ shown
on Map 5]. . . . Shanyin thus became a vast ﬂood. Whenever there were heavy
rains, the water was so placed that it spread far and wide. With only the
single lock at Jade Hill, it was impossible to drain it all off.
This was the price to be paid for irrigated agricuture. The terrain here was said
to have had ‘the conﬁguration of a water-jar’.
Between 1448 and 1511 at least thirteen new locks were built to drain off the
water of the West Small River both to the north and the south, and to drain
two ‘new rivers’. Both presumably ran north into the sea-gate area.148 These
measures were not adequate, and the temporary breaching of the dikes was
still required in emergencies. According to one source:149 “The mouths of the
two locks near Jade Hill are narrow in the extreme. When the water arrives
here it overﬂows almost a hundred square kilometers.150 When it reaches the
seawall it has become a ferocious and turbulent commotion that is a great
disaster for the farmland.” The Shanyin county gazetteer also commented that,
“once the dikes had been broken and the wild torrents had foamed swiftly
away, it was inevitable that the channels would rapidly run dry. The weary
people were then burdened by having to plug the breaches, yet before this
work had been completed they would be suffering from a shortage of water.”151
The solution lay in partially rerouting the Puyang River, using locks at and
near the Ma Stream152 to stop too much water coming north, and building of
the Yingxiu or Three Rivers’ Lock, whose twenty-eight sluices were each
named for one of the twenty-eight stellar mansions, across the mouth of the
Puyang at Three Rivers’ Mouth. It was constructed between two hills (the
southern one of which was a small outlier) that were joined by a natural stone
pavement into which the huge stones of the lock’s foundation were ‘mated’
and then calked with a paste made out of boiled millet stalks and lime or
mortar.153 It was ﬂanked to the north by an earth wall four thousand feet long
and four hundred feet broad, reinforced by iron and later bamboo, needed
because the mud of which this barrier had been made proved “unpredictable
at ﬁrst.” The ﬂow of water was regulated by a double layer of wooden planking
in each sluice. The construction is said to have been hurried. The threshold on
which the lock stood was not perfectly level and tight; the wooden boards
leaked and had to be repaired; and some of them had to be replaced every dry
season. The initial outlay was six thousand ounces of silver for the lock, and
that for the earth dike several times that amount. Both were raised by a levy on
acreage in the three counties affected. Labor was mobilized by conscripting

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

157

local commoners on a rotating basis. “With this, the water no longer behaved
violently, and the seawall was no longer deliberately breached and repaired.”
The massive lock was completed in 1537. Note the date. The engineered
separation of the Shaoxing plain water system from the sea was now total
except for the Cao'e River on the eastern edge. The result was the immediate
build-up of sediment deposits offshore:154
The tides were blocked by the lock and the earthen dike, and could no
longer insinuate themselves upstream. This made it possible to farm more
than seven hundred hectares within the seawall. Outside the dike, where
hills formed ﬂanking wings, the sediment became soil so that little by little
close to a further two thousand hectares of farmland could be obtained. The
marshy portions could be used for growing reeds. The brine could be drawn
off to make salt. The swampy pools could be used for ﬁshing. Mulberry trees
could be grown along the edges of its ﬁelds, and merchants could travel on
its paths.
Given that land formed on its seaward side following the lock’s building in
1537, it is likely that the ﬁlling in of the Major Southern Cleft and the ensuing
shift in the mouth of the Qiantang River in 1620 to the Minor Central Cleft
were in part the consequences of the preceding hydraulic closure of the coastal
plain along the southern shore of the bay.
It was said in the seventeenth century of the work of Tang Shao'en, the
creator of the Three Rivers’ Lock, that “with regard to the high and low conditions of the water, he regulated them to proportional quantities.”155 What this
means is that the peak discharge was replaced by a managed regime. In the
words of Cheng Mingjiu:156
In years past, both the sea and the river channel were deep. Today the sediment accumulates easily, and needs the ﬂowing river water to scour it clear.
The water of summer and fall is, however, closely linked to farming operations. It is necessary to conserve it with a grudging parsimony. When winter
has come, then there is no cause not to take the boards in the lock-sluices
down, or to desist from calking the ﬁssures in them with mud. . . . Before
the peak discharge is ﬁnished [in the early summer], the lock gates are
closed, but calking is not necessary. Once the peak discharge is past, it is
essential, once the gates have been shut, to calk the cracks. . . .
The lock was like a crude piece of experimental apparatus. Its management
had observable effects. As Cheng wrote:157
It is now a hundred and some tens of years since His Honor Tang built the
great lock, and renovation has been undertaken twice in the space of this

158

Patterns

time. . . . Over these years the tides have caused difﬁculties, with sediment
blocking it up, the problem being that there is no strategy for dredging it
clear. . . .
If the lowest boards of the deeper sluices are entirely removed, then the
state of the water will be swiftly rushing along, and the ferocity of the current
redoubled. The sediment that comes in with the tide will, in the same fashion,
be taken out by the tide. If it is not seen to that the lowest boards are removed,
then inevitably the current cannot move swiftly right down at the bottom.
It is, however, entirely the responsibility of the lock-workers to remove or
retain these lowermost boards at the times when the lock is vented. In the
deep sluices, where opening and closing off are difﬁcult, they either go only
halfway, or do not remove the boards completely. For this reason the clear
water ﬂoats over the top and the current does not reach to the bottom. The
sediment accumulates here, and there are no means of expeditiously draining
it away. This is one reason why the river is silted up.
The equipment had to be used properly if it was to perform its function, and
this was not always the case.
A lack of rain and an overly well-repaired lock could also trigger deposition.
The ‘Summary of Current Concerns’ relating to the lock noted that158
Harm caused by silt blockage began in 1671. After this time there were years
of hot, dry weather. Although the situation was manageable upstream of the
lock, it often happened that downstream the silt piled up as far as the East
Chan Spit at the mouth, and the water inside would often accumulate for a
month or more without draining away. After the repairs done to the lock in
1682, there were not many ﬁssures through which the water could leak out,
and the current in the river below the lock repeatedly ﬂowed in reverse direction. Under these conditions it was easy for the sediment to block it up.
The current was also slowed down by ﬁshing screens. Cheng noted that:159
What is more, curved screens are used to trap ﬁsh. According to the old
system, this would begin at mid-fall and the screens would then all be withdrawn after the ﬁrst full moon of the lunar new year. Today, the number of
ﬁshing screens has incessantly increased, and there is no season at which they
are withdrawn. Furthermore, multilayer ﬁshing screens are set up everywhere, cutting off the current and making . . . pools in which the waterweeds start to grow after enough time has passed. This is even more effective
in bringing the ﬂow to a stop.160
It was a familiar story: efforts to cope with the late-imperial pressure on
resources were triggering further awkward consequences.

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

159

The destruction of local vegetation cover also accelerated deposition in the
channel:161
In 1664 the main provincial army forces pastured their horses along the sea
coast by the mouth of the river. By so doing they destroyed all the reeds. The
salt-producing households took advantage of this opportunity to develop it all
as being ‘unvegetated land’.162 Since the turbid ﬂows were no longer confronted
by the reeds, whenever there was a ﬁerce rainstorm, the mud ﬂoating on top
of the bare land was swept into the river, where it accumulated. . . .
Since the reeds were destroyed by this pasturing of horses, the sand ﬂats
in several places have been eroding away for the last twenty years or so. Both
upstream and downstream of the lock the channel has been constantly full
of sediment. It is from the fact that this has been happening for the last
twenty years or so that it is possible to be certain that it is because of the
destruction of the reeds that the river is ﬁlling up, and, perhaps, that the land
is eroding. . . .
Although there is no unvarying pattern to erosion and deposition, it is
deposition that dominates, and this is an omen that the land surface is in the
course of extending. After a few more years the sea mouth will be locked shut.
There is thus a persuasive case that the historical build-up of the Southern
Sediments peninsula from the south was in a signiﬁcant measure the unintended result of human hydraulic engineering. Since the land was cultivable,
it was not in itself a disaster. The problem lay on the now vulnerable northern
shore where the seawall was under constant threat, and behind which lay the
Grand Canal.
In spite of the immensity of the forces at work, the conception of controlling the bay itself therefore emerged in the eighteenth century. In 1723 the
Yongzheng Emperor favored dredging one of the blocked mouths of the
Qiantang “so that there is a throughﬂow, causing the tides not to make an
obstruction by dropping their load of sediment” and thus safeguarding the
Haining (Yan'guan) seawall.163 The clearest example of this interventionist
approach was the plan put forward in 1732 to build a stone barrier across the
neck of the sea separating the Lesser Jianshan hill on the mainland east of
Haining from Mount Ta about half a kilometer off the coast: “It will divide and
overcome the force of the water, so that the tides go south, and we may anticipate the renewed deposition of protective sands along the northern bank.”164
This barrier was to be 1820 Chinese feet in length, and it was estimated that it
would have to range from 40 to 130 feet in depth. When the ﬁnal sector of 810
feet was completed in 1739, however, the greatest depths were reported to be
only 18 to 19 feet because of the deposition of ‘ﬂoating sand’, or as we would

160

Patterns

say ‘suspended sediment’. The disparity was commented on, but no further
explanation given.
Groins of two sorts were also built to neutralize the impact of the waves on
the northern seawall. One type was the ‘chicken’s-beak bar’, a narrow, pointed
spit whose purpose was to “deﬂect the return ﬂow so that the fury of the waves
would ﬁnd it hard to act in mutually reinforcing fashion.”165 The other type
was the semicircular ‘grass platter’, which was described as “a barrier-dike to
deﬂect the water” sticking out into the sea, and thirty or forty feet high. The
rationale behind it was that, “in those places where the dike is fundamentally
stable, it may happen that when sands have piled up on the shore opposite, or
sand bars have accumulated out of sight under the sea, the pattern of force in
the water will strike directly against the dike, which being thus assaulted will
no longer be safe but in peril. For this reason ‘grass platters’ are built to deﬂect
the currents.”166 In practice it may have served as a sort of artiﬁcial headland
refracting the waves around itself in such a way as to reduce the energy
impacting on the unprotected stretches of shore.
A third protective measure was the ‘water-leveler’. This was a kind of
hydraulic glacis sloping downward at the foot of the outer side of the seawall.
It was constructed with rubble, topped with stone slabs secured between
double rows of timber pilings. The idea may have been to destroy the coherence of waves being reﬂected from the seawall, and so lessen their capacity for
undermining the wall’s foundations by interacting with the incoming waves.
The Record of the Seawall observed that:167
To the east of Haining, however [in contrast to the ﬁrm ‘iron-board sands’
of Haiyan discussed immediately before this], in the district around the
Jian hills, there is also water from the river ﬂowing down. The tide and
the river strike against each other in conﬂict, and if the tidal bore then rises
high, feeling out the shore at an oblique angle and gnawing at it sideways
on, the resulting situation is impossible to resist. Furthermore, when the
tide is ebbing, the river water, following the lie of the land, washes and
scours the mud away.168 If the foot of the seawall is not solid, it is hard to
be without anxieties. For this reason the seawall at Haining has been
repeatedly rebuilt. After the main body of the seawall was doubled in size
the hydraulic glacis at its base was also doubled, but since on all previous
occasions rubble was used, even though numerous slabs were laid, from
three to ﬁve layers of them, it was still easily scattered. Thus there have
been frequent relayings, and this is in no way a policy that provides a
permanent solution.
When that part of the seawall that directly defended Haining city, some 5,052
Chinese feet, was being rebuilt in stone in the early 1730s, it was given a glacis

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

161

that it was hoped would be massive enough to resist this destruction. Each
section of this glacis, some 10 feet long and 12 feet across, contained about
100,800 jin of rubble, of the general order of 60 tonnes169 about 6 feet deep, and
had a covering of stone slabs 7 inches thick, and 12 feet by 1.2 feet in size. The
size of the undertaking is evident: the weight of the rubble alone in the 505
sections would have been approximately 30,000 tonnes. An indirect cost of the
development of rice farming on the other shore.
This was the rationale behind the efforts to clear a central exit for the river
in the mid-1730s:170
Although the disasters to the seawalls take place on the northern shore in
Haining county, the causes of the trouble are on the south shore. This is
because on the south shore there are always sandy foreshores rising up by
deposition, and deﬂecting the current so that it goes northward, and the
seawalls are in ever more danger. . . .
Grand Secretary Ji Zengyun created the method of ‘making use of the
water to attack the sand’. He either used metal implements to excavate the
sandy islands of the southern shore in a way that followed the lie of the land,
or ‘cut off the roots’ in accordance with the ﬂow of the current,171 or else dug
channels to meet the incoming tide, so causing the water of the river and the
tides of the sea to come and go day and night, themselves doing the
scouring. The ﬂow of the river moved toward the south shore day by day,
while on the north shore the deposited sands grew daily higher. Thus was
the great work accomplished.
In 1744, the governor, Chang'an, contrived the means to dredge an induction channel through the Minor Central Cleft; and, in the area around
Mount Shu, he used as before the method of cutting the sand. On the inside
he dredged and scooped, while on the outside he extracted and cut. In the
spring and summer of 1747 the tides little by little swung towards the south,
and the deposited sands [on the north side?] appeared wider and wider each
day. In 1748 the Minor Central Cleft was ﬂowing through in full, and it is by
no means certain that the method of cutting the sands was unconnected
with this success.
At the same time as an exit channel was being cut south of Mount Shu, the
Qianlong Emperor ordered that bamboo panniers (presumably with stones in
them) should be placed along the northern shore of the bay “to deﬂect the
current and suspend the silt.”172 The late-imperial authorities thus believed—
for a time—that it was to some extent within their power even to manipulate
the coastal sea. But, as the Qianlong Emperor had noted and we have already
recorded, it was all over by about 1780. The channel had shifted to the north.
But the dikes held.

162

Patterns

Comment
Large hydraulic systems were thus one of the key forms of lock-in in premodern China. Each successful solution was apt to lead to new problems. It is
not for the moment practical to try to quantify the costs in the case just
described, but it makes sense to talk of lock-in in terms of the perceptions of
the ofﬁcials and members of the gentry responsible for making decisions.
When the government cut in half the funds for the maintenance of the
Three Rivers’ Lock in 1678, in order to make money available for military
expenditures, the harvests in Shaoxing suffered for year after year in consequence.173 Likewise, it was said in 1682 on a stele inscribed in memory of ‘His
Honor Jiang’ that if the dike along the West Small River (the ‘old Puyang’ in
Map 5) was breached, “the ﬁelds of three counties had no harvest for two
years.”174 The compilation of the documents relating to the Three Rivers’ Lock,
and a two-volume supplement in 1854,175 was primarily motivated by a
concern for continuity in the methods used by those undertaking maintenance and reconstruction. As one of the prefaces observed, “Alas! If there are
founders of enterprises in this world, there must be continuators who come
after them.”176
The scale of work needed for a major renovation may be seen from the
report on that directed in 1578 by Prefect Xiao Lianggan. It cost about sixty per
cent of the original construction only forty-one years earlier:177
They ﬁrst built crossdikes upstream and downstream of the lock, in order
to provide a barrier against ﬂoods and tides [while the work was in
progress]. The method used for these was that of heaped earth faced with
slabs of stone. They also emplaced small ‘shuttle mounds’ in front of the
lock [perhaps raised walkways on which the workmen could walk back and
forth to access their work]. They used stones mated in interlocking fashion,
built upward from below. Whenever they met with ﬁssures in these stones,
they would consolidate them with [molten] cast iron.
On the top of the lock, from head to tail, they ensured that the covering
stones were level; and they further added large stones on both sides of each
sluice to serve as water-guides, so that each of the twenty-eight sluices was
separately fed by a sluice-way cut in these guides.
In places where there were cracks or splits they would pour in [molten]
tin to which the ash of glutinous millet178 had been added. They also
attended in comprehensive and scrupulous fashion to the base-boards, the
threshold stones, and the banks on both sides, wherever these needed
repairing, replacing, or resetting in correct alignment, and wherever mortar
or iron were needed. . . .

Water and the Costs of System Sustainability

163

They spent several thousand ounces of silver, and employed several thousand workers. The project was completed in three months. . . .
The shape of the lock was stronger and thicker. It was on this account
really a second creation.179
The nature of routine maintenance may be seen from the regulations left by
Prefect Xiao, and the other ofﬁcials who also rebuilt the lock over the following
century. The following is an example:180
Item: There are 1,113 lock boards [used to close off the sluices]. Each one is
8.3 inches across and 4.2 inches thick. The labor cost is 0.3 ounces of silver.
On each board is a pair of iron rings, weighing 12 ounces. The labor cost is
0.06 ounces of silver. The selection and procurement of material for these
boards shall be entrusted either to honest and capable ofﬁcials or to the lock
ofﬁcials themselves. They shall be furnished with the money and go in
person into the hills to purchase large pine trees at standard prices, and hire
artisans to split them into sections. The pieces used should have all four
corners square, and be sturdy and without imperfections. Those with ﬂimsy
edges are to serve as rooﬁng-boards. . . . Old boards are to be replaced every
other year, and the lock-workers are to send them as before to the area in
front of the Zuosheng temple for the quantity to be veriﬁed. If there is a
shortfall, they are to be punished and obliged to make restitution, and the
same will apply if there are cases of boards being carried off by the current
when the lock has been being opened, or of having rotted when piled up
together, or of having been stolen.
This was but a small part of a task that was seen as severely taxing the local
inhabitants.
In a stele dated 1630 and commemorating the dredging of the Qianqing
River (part of the ‘old Puyang’) by the prefect of Shaoxing,181 the burdens of
water control are likened to the attacks made on China by the northern
barbarians:182
The disasters caused by water in the Southeast are like the troubles occasioned by the barbarians under the late Southern Song dynasty. A poison to
our people when they entered, and trampled upon our cities. Yet the
afﬂiction of water is worse than they were. . . .
Though the Yan Brook rushes down vigorously into the southern parts of
Shaoxing, and the Qiantang River and the sea have ﬁerce tides that shake its
north, disasters such as the present blocking-up have not been heard of
before. Among these are the approximately 210 hectares or more of newly
emerged sands stretching out from Houguo,183 which have caused the nature

164

Patterns

of the water to become unruly, rushing northward and then following a
path southward. The fertile soil in the places harmed has been engulfed and
cannot pay its taxes. The thread-like length of seawall, struck both head-on
and at an angle, has had no means to resist it. When the ﬂoodwaters broke
in during the spring, there was no wheat harvest. When they broke through
in the fall there was no rice harvest. . . .
Though the county magistrates spent their treasure to buy masonry, and
led the people to rebuild the seawalls, yet time and again the wild waves
ﬂooded in, and the stones did not always adhere ﬁrmly together. This was
indeed bestowing a fortune on the boundless ﬂoods, or like repeatedly
sending our wealth each year to the barbarians at the time of the Southern
Song, without being able to sate their desires. . . . [Although the prefect has
had the river dredged,] the situation resembles that caused by the barbarians after 1126 when the Northern Song capital fell, and the exhaustion of
our people is like that following the demographic contraction after the
migration south at that time. But for Prefect Liu, though, those of our
people who live here would now be ﬁsh and turtles.
Hydraulic responsibility could be shirked but not escaped. Unless by luck the
pattern of local natural forces changed—and that too had its costs—the past
held the present captive.
A paradox has to be confronted. The same skill in water control that had
contributed so greatly to the development of the Chinese economy in ancient,
medieval, and even in the early part of late-imperial times, slowly fashioned a
straitjacket that in the end hindered any easy reinvention of the economic
structure. Neither water nor suitable terrain was available for further
proﬁtable hydraulic expansion. A remarkable but prescientiﬁc technology was
approaching the limits of its capacities. Deadliest of all, hydrological systems
kept twisting free from the grip of human would-be mastery, drying out,
silting up, ﬂooding over, or changing their channels. By doing so they
devoured the resources needed to keep them under control or serviceable. And
made these resources unavailable for other purposes prior to the coming of
modern engineering. No other society reshaped its hydraulic landscape with
such sustained energy as did the Chinese, nor on such a scale, but the dialectic
of long-term interaction with the environment transformed what had been a
one-time strength into a source of weakness.

Particularities

7
Richness to Riches:
The Story of Jiaxing
Jiaxing is to the south of the lower Yangzi delta, on the coast of the east region.
In many ways its story over the last two millennia can be taken as a model for
most of China. It was far from being one of the earliest areas of traditional
Chinese intensive urban–agricultural growth. The major centers of this were
in the Northeast, the Northwest, and a part of the West. But because it was
something of a latecomer, compared to these cultural heartlands, it had the
advantage that we can glean a notion of what it was like before it was developed, which is less true of the older north.1 At the same time, the process of
premodern development ran its course here to what can be loosely thought of
as its logical completion. Many other areas, especially along the frontiers, had
not moved so far by the time the empire ended; or else had gone into decline,
as did much of the old Northwest. This makes it a useful region to take as at
least a preliminary model, though of course every area—not least Jiaxing—
had its own particularities.
The most awkward problem we face is the fragmentation of the sources.
Time and again an interesting story starts and is not ﬁnished. Too often we
sense that something important is going on under the surface, particularly
social and political conﬂicts, but the narrative merely hints at it. It does not
pursue it. The interplay of interpretative imagination and a severe factual
discipline is constantly needed to create a picture that is both coherent and
plausible. It can be a difﬁcult undertaking.

168

Particularities

The story in outline
Jiaxing in the early imperial age was a reed-covered marshland where wild rice
is said to have grown.2 Cultivated rice was raised by the rough-and-ready
method known as ‘plowing by burning, and weeding by ﬂooding’.3 Other occupations at this time were ﬁshing, hunting, boiling brine from the sea for salt,
and cutting timber in the hills.4 This last does not reappear in medieval times
or later, which suggests deforestation. Food, including fruits and shellﬁsh, was
so abundant that the poor are said to have lived from day to day without
needing to keep reserves. “They have no anxieties about going cold or hungry.”5
Jiaxing in medieval times was still environmentally rich, though more
domesticated and decorated by human art than it had been under the early
empire. It had become a domain shaped by water control, by seawalls, canals,
and locks and levees, and pinned down by roads and bridges. Its natural visage
was now set off, like a face by beauty spots, with inscribed stone steles
bestowing their stories, and hence their meanings, on particular places, and by
Buddhist and Daoist temples that both enhanced and also spiritually subdued
the once wild slopes and summits. Magic still lingered in the landscape, the
memories of Daoist immortals and the illustrious dead, of the rain-bringing
dragons that haunted the wells and springs, and of local deities with dominion
over epidemics, locusts, and other disasters.
Blocking off the sea with seawalls, desalinating the land within them, and
creating polders developed slowly under the middle empire. It was by no
means yet technically perfected.6 This can be seen from such comments in the
thirteenth-century gazetteer as that certain lakes had “recently . . . all become
enclosed ﬁelds,” but that where more dikes and ﬁelds had been built along
their edges, “the annual ﬂoods are stored in an increasingly constricted space.”7
A familiar recipe for disaster in years of heavy rainfall. The polders, though,
were the key to the spread of intensive rice cultivation based on precise
control of the input and draining of water, and the backbreaking transplantation of seedlings, which allows the maximal exploitation of the area of each
ﬁeld. Water had to be pumped in at transplanting time, and later pumped out
as the harvest ripened. Returns to resources (that is, land) were increased at the
cost of what, if we imagine other technology held constant for the purpose of
the argument, were diminishing returns to an hour of work. Keeping the
channels dredged, and the locks maintained, also proved an unending labor.8
The sea remained dangerous. Every storm left the corpses of the drowned
washed up on the sands.9
In Haiyan county there was no natural source of irrigation water, which had
to be drawn from ofﬁcial reservoirs. Ten days without rain could set all the

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

169

pumps working in the fear that the rice-ﬁelds would dry out.10 Reeds had to be
cultivated to serve as fuel for brine-boiling, which points to a shortage of
wood. Crops newly mentioned as economically important in medieval times
include wheat, beans, hemp, and cotton. The resource base of cultivated, as
opposed to wild, plants was widening. Silk was now also produced.11
At the end of the middle empire and during the later empire, environmental, economic, and social stress is apparent everywhere. In 1838, just before
the middle of the nineteenth century, the population was around 2,933,76412
and possibly more than thirty times what it had been two thousand years
before, in the roughest of rough terms. A speculative estimate of the “Handynasty” population gives 79,431 inhabitants, which in fact implies a multiplication of about 37 times over almost two millennia.13 It is hard to be conﬁdent
of the Tang-dynasty ﬁgures as the future ‘Jiaxing’ area was embedded in the
larger Wu (or ‘Suzhou’) commandery. The data for the two constituent counties of Haiyan and Jiaxing for the ‘Tang’, without further indication of the
period, give 30,254 households, which might have been as many as 151,270
persons, using a round ratio of 5 per household.14 In other words, population
roughly doubled in the ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst millennium ce. The most rapid
growth took place from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries, recorded
population rising from 693,310 in 1080 ce to almost 2,290,260 in 1290.15 This is
a growth rate of almost 0.6 per cent per year for over 210 years. There were
considerable ﬂuctuations in recorded numbers after this date, which were
probably a mix of actual changes and changes in the comprehensiveness of
statistical coverage.16 At the “beginning of the Ming” (in the later fourteenth
century) there were 1,112,121 recorded inhabitants, and 2,416,105 in 1769.17 In
other words the medieval economic revolution, with an annual growth rate
over twice that of the later part of the middle Qing era,18 seems to have been
the distinctive formative experience for the environmental–economic character of Jiaxing, though the pressure eased in the Ming,19 and presumably again
in the widespread troubles of the middle of the seventeenth century, before
intensifying again after perhaps some time around 1700.
One symptom of late-imperial-period stress was the degendering of technology, especially in farming. Women were becoming a crucial additional
part of the agricultural workforce. While producing silk yarn remained
primarily women’s work,20 in areas like Haiyan, where “the land is constricted
and the people numerous, to the extent that exerting oneself at farming does
not yield a sufﬁciency,” rearing silkworms was an “urgent matter” in which
the men also took part, mostly through the cultivation of mulberry trees.
When the silkworms were feeding, “the men do not wash and the women
do not comb themselves.”21 If the silkworms failed, the sericulturalists might

170

Particularities

have to sell their children.22 Seawalls were stronger in this later period, huge
constructions faced with stone, and often equipped with the sloping glacis on
the seaward side and groins referred to in the preceding chapter.23 Apart from
this last, a millennium and a half of development had left life and livelihood
if anything more vulnerable to extreme events than they had been at the
beginning, when there had been reserves of natural resources to buffer
economic crises.
Late-imperial rice-farming had turned into multicropping with dry-land
winter crops. In a good year these could provide half the year’s harvest, but
there was an extra cost in labor because the paddies had to be drained as dry
as possible before the winter planting, just as the polder walls had to be rebuilt
each year to stop ﬂooding.24 An ever more dense network of markets did
provide some added resilience in the face of disasters. They made it possible,
for example, to buy new rice seedlings if it was necessary to replant after a
ﬂood.25 Given that the cash was in hand to do so, or the credit available.
The intensity of labor is conveyed in the sources by such remarks as that in
the busy season “women and children work ﬂat out” at planting wheat and
beans, caring for mulberry trees, and building threshing ﬂoors.26 Where water
was distant from the ﬁelds, double pumping was used. The variability of
the climate demanded constant small adjustments in the schedules of
planting out, and particular varieties of cereals had to be ﬁnely matched to
local variations in the soil and location to maximize yields. Applying supplementary fertilizer to the crops while they were growing was a late-imperial
reﬁnement that improved output, but it could easily be mistimed.27 Collecting
and buying fertilizer, often from some way away, placed further pressure on
time and money.
This transition from richness to riches, as it may be epitomized, a paradoxical mix of gains and losses, was accompanied by other transformations and
also involved other costs. One such transformation was that much of the
‘magic’ passed out of nature. At least among the elite, whose records are the
basis of our story, the enchantment and miracles of ancient and medieval
times seem to have faded from the groves and the streams without however
vanishing entirely. They were replaced by a world of increasingly rational and
secular calculation, though uncontrollable catastrophes like the frequent
epidemics still evoked frenzied religious responses.28 Above all, though, it
locked local society in to a particular style of economic functioning from
which escape was difﬁcult. Within the limited possibilities open to the sophisticated, if still premodern, technology that had developed over the millennia,
it became all but impossible to move in a different strategic direction if the
same numbers of people were to be supported.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

171

The sea
In early-imperial times, the sea inﬁltrated deeply into Jiaxing, so that it was
an environmentally ambiguous world, half saline water and half salt marsh.
As the system of seawalls and locks and levees and polders became articulated
in the middle empire and the ﬁrst centuries of the late empire, the sea
was excluded, except for the occasional violent storms when it broke in
through human defenses. Little by little the water and land inside the defensive
perimeters were desalinated and separated.
Storm surges driven by the northeast wind were the most dangerous threat
to the fragile lines of defense. Here is a description of the county of Haiyan
(whose name means ‘sea salt’) from the late-nineteenth-century gazetteer:29
Only Haiyan confronts the sea face-on. When one looks east, there is no
limit visible. To the south the mountains of Ganpu and to the north those
of Zhapu offer resistance and support on either side. When one looks from
far away, there is no defense at all for the more than twenty-ﬁve kilometers
within the curve like an ox’s horns that lies between them. These can only
rely on the single line of the defensive dike, which does daily battle with the
water of the tides. The magnitude of the rise and fall of the tides depends,
however, on whether or not there is a wind from the northeast helping it to
inﬂict damage. . . .
When the weather is ﬁne and the aethers bright, the wind does not howl.
Even the large spring tides during the ‘mildew rains’ [in June and July]30 and
the dog days [in July and August] do no more than surge up along the
seawall, where they revolve and fall back. If, however, there is a wild gale
riding upon the tides, even during the severe cold of the depths of winter, it
is like silver mountains approaching in closely crowded ranks. They press
close against the body of the dike. They show their power as they make their
impact. Those that strike and leap straight upward seem like countless white
dragons rising aloft and scattering into a ﬂying rain that splashes and spills
behind the seawall. Those that tug at it from below resemble sharp hills
being smashed to pieces. They are destroyed with a roar. The waves’
onslaught is unceasing. The noise is like that of a war between a million
thunderstorms. Before the tide in front has fallen, the tide behind it is rising
up again. For two or three days the wind gives them their rhythm. Sometimes the wind falls but the tide does not go down. The entire sea will be
rocking and rolling, in a state in which it cannot swiftly become calm.
Last year31 there were repeated storm surges and danger such as had not
been seen for ten years past. . . . The tiles ﬂew off all the rooftops and great
trees were ripped out. All one could hear was the sound of the wind, the

172

Particularities

sound of the rain, and the sound of the tide coming across through the air
and beating down upon us. No ofﬁcial or commoner in the area had the
facial expression of a human being. . . .
People who lived under such a threat had to possess social and political discipline. If they were to safeguard their lives, they had to accept, even welcome, a
certain degree of state interference, including coercion, in the organization of
the necessary public works.
Two lines from a poem on a storm by Zhang Shiya, probably from the Ming,
show how easily the lost linkage between land and sea could reassert itself.
After speaking of the “unmasterable grief of this storm-tossed watery land” as
the “fearful billows” roll in, he observes that
Waves link together vast wetlands, overﬂowing the ﬂood-dragon’s lair.
Tides shift the egrets’ sand banks, and set trembling the multiple lakes.32
It is likely that Zhang regarded the ﬂood-dragon as being as ‘real’ as the egrets.
Rows of these large birds standing in silhouetted lines on distant sand-ﬂats in
Hangzhou Bay are among my most vivid memories of this area. As so often,
there is a political undertone to this poem. Zhang ends by saying he is shedding tears “for state policies and the hardships faced by the people.”
The disasters that could occur when the sea broke in are evoked with brutal
images in a poem by Zhang Yongquan on the storm that smashed through the
seawalls of Shanghai, Jiading, and Chuansha in 1696. These areas were further
north up the coast than Jiaxing, and perhaps more exposed, but they shared the
same general environment, and, indeed, the same long seawall. Here are three
sections showing how the coastal inhabitants struggled to avoid their fate:33
Some of the people used ropes, to tie themselves together,
Hoping this way to support each other, or give each other help.
How were they to know that, together, they’d be swept away and drowned?
Some of them sought to escape, boring holes in the rooves of their houses,
But their bodies, along with their reed-thatched shacks, were borne off
and tossed about.
Some clutched at beams and rafters, and let themselves go where these
went,
But the wind pounded and battered them, and scattered them east and west.
Some clambered to the tops of trees, where they ﬂoated for a time,
But snakes climbed up to the treetops, driven, too, by fear of dying.
Men, scared the snakes would bite their hands, of themselves released their
hold.
Men and snakes have gone, together, into the other world. . . .

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

173

The downpour ceased at dawn, but the storm did not let up.
Those people who had not been drowned congratulated each other.
Then they saw a sand bank far away, among the rolling waves,
Where a thousand others called for help that their lives, too, be saved.
The tide came in, then, with a swirl, and half of them went down.
With the second swirl the bank submerged, and every one was
drowned. . . .
Their faces, two days later on, were still easy to recognize.
Like mounds, or hillocks, the washed-up corpses had stacked themselves
in piles.
By the third day, or the fourth, skin and ﬂesh were soggy-rotten.
One could smell the stench some thirty miles. It made one want to vomit.
Zhang goes on to describe how the ﬁsh ate the corpses’ intestines, and the birds
pecked at their livers and brains. He concludes by asking why the people who
lived by the seaside should have been so guilty that they deserved this extraordinary punishment. A punishment inﬂicted, without distinction, on the
worthy and the misguided, and the old and the young. This takes us into the
world of moral meteorology which is discussed in chapter 12. The poet’s
answer here is that it was the doing of the God of the Sea, but he offers no
deeper reason as to why.
The sea could also be a source of physical and aesthetic excitement, even
moments both of release from social inhibitions, and of an initiation into
mystical exaltation, to which fear gave an added intensity. Some doggerel
verses from Ming times by Shen Yaozhong about a day he spent on the Jiaxing
beach touch on all these themes.
The reference to the whale almost certainly alludes to the legend that
the Tang-dynasty poet Li Bo ascended to heaven on one of these beasts. The
Heavenly Weaving Maid was a star-spirit who lived on one side of the Milky
Way, separated by it from her sweetheart, the star-spirit called the Cow Lad.
She is said once to have given a magical stone to a band of explorers looking
for the source of the Yellow River which, some people believed, ran in the skies
as the Milky Way. Commonplace and exalted, as well as wry humor, are mixed
in unusual fashion:34
Lifting up my lower robes, I go out by the sea’s shore,
Where — kicking away my clogs — I feel contact with its pebbles.
For several hundred paces, I stride along through the water
With legs immersed, maybe, some two or three feet in depth.

174

Particularities

Among the things I bump against is the stump of an old tree.
Making it serve me as a mat, I sit in a squat upon it;
Calling out to my serving-lad, to bring the wine jar to me,
I condemn myself to the forfeit of gulping down a goblet.
Under the soles of my feet I push the corals loose,35
Throwing ﬁsh, and shrimps, into agitation behind my splashing wrists.36
I turn, and I gaze at the sea, its colors all in movement.
— Along the eastern skyline lies a single streak of crimson.
For a ﬂeeting instant, only the top — of the panorama’s before me,
Then, for a moment, all of it — rises up into my vision,
Where the pennons leading the cloud-fronts are spread ﬂying, in disorder,
And like glittering spears in clusters are the rays from low-lying mists.
Its whiskers lifting up, the sea gives a long-drawn roar,
The resonance setting shaking the Dragon–Serpent’s mansion.
The silver mountains tumble over, on the land, as they roll forward,
While the snowy breakers drain away into nothing as they attack.
The serving-lads are faltering: they walk with shortened steps.
Every one of my friends — my guests — has by now made good his escape!
So it is, as I sit on the rotted stump, and spreading out my legs,
That, doing just whatever I please, I throw off all restraint.
My feet atop his head, I am borne by a mighty whale,
With the Great Boar stars supporting me, from underneath my shoulders.
Now that I desire to travel, along the Milky Way,
I shall ask the Heavenly Weaving Maid to give me her magic stone!
My senses in confusion, I leave with a pounding heart,
Returning, once again, down the old familar paths.
To ﬁnd my well-tried friends continuing with their party,
Where they calm me with the comfort of a kindly proffered draught. . . .
Few birds are now about. The tide has long since ebbed.
Yanghou — the wave-spirit — ’s, traces are no longer to be seen.
Leaving me uncertain if there’s any past or present:
It seems as if, all at once, this great Earth had come into being.
Still unable to sleep, at home, when I return,
In every wall beside me are the autumn insects. Chirping.
Chinese landsmen, like Shen, did not see the sea as a kind of chaos gnawing
away evilly, but vainly, at the eternal reliability of the land guaranteed by God,

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

175

as was the case to some extent in early-modern northwestern Europe.37 Earlier,
though, under the middle empire, there had been something like a milder
version of this European view in the Jiaxing popular belief that the raised ﬁftykilometer-long ridges, based on immense quantities of oyster and mussel
shells, that ran between the prefectural capital and the sea, were “the means
used by Heaven to put a limit to the ocean and preserve the people of Wu.”38
Nor did Shen see the sea as the home of demons, as seems to have been the case
to a certain degree with premodern Bali, for example.39 But it was the dwelling
of gods and immortals, as another of his poems makes clear.40 It frightened
most people unaccustomed to it, as we can see by the panicky behavior of
Shen’s guests and servants. Partly for this reason it was also, for those capable
of responding to it, a source of physical excitement and metaphysical visions.
Nor, unlike Europeans before the eighteenth century, did the Chinese regard
the shoreline as stable. Experience made it evident the opposite was the case.
In some areas of Jiaxing inhabited land had been swept away, as in the case of
Wangpan, mentioned in the previous chapter. Once it had been linked with
the mainland, but according to Chang Tang, writing in the Song dynasty,41
The Wangpan mountains are far out to sea, though the pillars of the bridge
are still standing. In 1241, one could still ﬁnd such things as old wells, small
stone bridges, and stumps of large trees along the shoreline in the tide. If
one looked at the characters inscribed on the bricks of these wells, one could
learn that a military colony had been stationed here in Eastern Jin times [the
fourth century ce].
The late-Ming gazetteer tells us that:42
According to the Song-dynasty gazetteer, there were in those days, some
twenty-ﬁve kilometers to the south of Haiyan city, the Water-Storage
Barrage, and, one-and-a-half kilometers south of this, the Indigo Field Inlet.
One-and-a-half kilometers east lay the Transverse Inlet, which was linked to
the east with Guyi,43 and to the south entered the sea. There were also the
Thirty-Six Sands, the Nine Mud Flats, the Eighteen Mounds, and the Seven
Peaks of Mount Huangpan [Wangpan] spread out in a row along the foreshore of the sea.
Today the county capital is a mere two hundred and ﬁfty meters from the
ocean. The traces of the barrages and dikes of former times have all been
engulfed by the sea, and Jinshan [a mountain to the north] is ever further
and further away. The tides mount the semi-submerged sand bar between
Mount Kan and Mount Zhe,44 ﬂowing in a rotating manner to strike against
the territories of Haining and Huangwan. When they reach the strait
between the land and the former Qin-dynasty military station on White

176

Particularities

Tower Rocks [today two kilometers offshore], their position-power is
doubly agitated. Rogue waves, carried by the wind, destroy people’s
cottages, damage the rice harvest, and are a grief to all of Wu.45 Proposals for
dikes have become a matter of urgency.
It was a landscape in perpetual transformation. Conversely, the shore built up
in other places, like the Nanhui peninsula at the south tip of the mouth of the
Yangzi, slightly to the north of Jiaxing.46
By late Ming or early Qing times, the battle against the sea was basically won
here, as we have seen in the previous chapter.

Polders
In the course of many centuries in the Middle Ages the ambivalent landscape
was controlled by the building of polders. The literal translation for the
Chinese term is ‘surrounded ﬁelds’. They had the shape of shallow inverted
conical hats. A raised rim—the protective dike—ran around the outside, and
channels sloped gently down to a common drainage ditch at the bottom.
Draining the polder meant pumping the water out of this ditch with a pedaled
pump that dragged it up a square open trough by means of pallets linked
together into a continuous wooden chain. Backbreaking work.
During the middle empire and the ﬁrst half of the later empire, the ﬁelds of
the better-off were located at the top of the polder, where the farmers both had
easier access to the water outside, and could more easily drain them into the
ditch below. In the relatively more egalitarian rural society of Qing times, the
pattern tended to shift to ﬁelds divided like slices of pie, all of them running
down from the top to the bottom in the center. The prefectural gazetteer for
1600 has the following account of the ﬁrst transformation:47
Polder ﬁelds in the prefecture The streams and creeks crisscross north and
south. This is said to be the remnants of the pattern of the well-ﬁelds of
antiquity [laid out in ticktacktoe grids] but there are no details available.48
In 763–4 ce, under the Tang, the commissioner for military colonies Zhu
Zimian dredged the ditches to reach the sluice-ways, and the sluice-ways to
reach the streams, and for the ﬁrst time they were of economic beneﬁt. Later
the prefect Yu You repaired the dikes, cleared the river junctions [or ‘feeder
canals’], cut down the trees, and signposted the roads. . . .
At this time the prefecture consisted of the two counties of Jiaxing and
Haiyan. The land in Jiaxing has a level character, making it easy to prepare in

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

177

advance for droughts and ﬂoods. Haiyan faces the sea and runs parallel
with a range of hills, being high to the south and sloping down toward
the north. If there are ten days without rain, the ﬁelds have no recourse. It
was therefore a matter of urgency to have locks and embankments. Haiyan
as it is today has the three hundred and one old creeks opened in 821–4 ce
by Li E, who also created the Ever-Bumper Locks. During 993 to 1003 ce,
under the Song, Lu Zongdao redirected the water in Indigo Field Inlet
and White Tower Channel over a distance of nine kilometers. In 1056–63
Li Weiji dredged the sluice-ways and drains, installed wooden locks, and
put in place thirty district-boundary embankments.49 In 1131 to 1162 Li
Zhiyang repaired eighty district-boundary embankments, and the two EverBumper Locks.50 He also built twenty-four embankments along branch
channels. Later, Zhao Danxi dredged the two dike-side waterways51 at Black
Mound and Summonwealth,52 and built eighty-one embankments. Such is
what was accomplished by the embankments and locks of Haiyan.
Hydraulic domestication thus took about four hundred years. The participation of the state at a subregional level seems often to have been crucial.
Underneath the success story lay social and political conﬂicts driven by
different economic and environmental interests. Something of the way in which
state and private interests could clash emerges from a more general account of
the Jiangnan region as a whole:53
As regards polders, the Qian family [who ruled the state of Wu-Yue during
the Five Dynasties period54] had instituted four sections of ‘battalion-ﬁelds
troops’, totalling eight hundred men, who devoted themselves solely to
matters affecting farmland. The Song dynasty abolished the battalion-ﬁelds
troops, but in 1234 to 1236 the transport commissioner Qiao Weiyue once
again excavated the ditches and embankments that they had been in charge
of, in order to facilitate transport by water [of tax-grain].
The rich commoners, who were taking the full amount of rents from the
farmland, did not repair these polders, and crassly considered that repeatedly altering the farmland was a pointless undertaking. If the ﬁelds
produced a doubled harvest they only received the same amount of rent. On
account of all this, their tenants were able to proﬁt from the seasonal inundations, and in consequence bored holes in the aging dikes so that they
could catch ﬁsh [who came in through the holes], or grew crops on [top of]
them. In some cases the destruction spread to neighboring polders. Thus
the dikes around the ﬁelds were totally ruined. When the heavy rains came
in spring and summer, the ﬁelds would be an expanse of water.

178

Particularities

In 1022 a commissioner was sent out by imperial decree to take the direction of the troops from the various sectors in clearing out the obstructions
[in the waterways]. In 1058 the transport commissioner . . . sent up a report,
and an imperial decree ordered the county authorities to command their
commoners to make dikes around their ﬁelds in such a way that they all
joined together continuously, and indicated that inferior or superior
administrative performance would be judged according to this criterion. In
1059 another decree instituted ‘river-clearance troops’ and established the
Wu River commander and three other commanders to undertake hydraulic
maintenance.
Thus the state was perpetually intervening, using the military if it was thought
appropriate.
In this last case, state ﬁscal interests were presumably involved; but transport versus irrigation was a common conﬂict. The description of the single
reliable transport link between the town and the sea in the gazetteer for Ganpu
gives an example of this. Unusually, a private initiative held the upper hand
here, for a time at least, over an irritated ofﬁcialdom:55
The Three Kilometer Crossdike56 lies three kilometers west of the town. It is
several fathoms in height57 from top to bottom. The three villages of Huishang, Ganpu, and Shifan depend on it to protect the supply of water to their
irrigated ﬁelds. Ships and boats come and go; and it is in truth the gateway
to the town. For this reason a capstan-turned cable58 [to haul vessels up or
down the ramp at its side] has been installed, and comes at present under
the authority of the commandant of the town.
One-And-A-Half Kilometer Crossdike lies one-and-a-half kilometers to
the west of the town. Originally this crossdike did not exist, but in July 1249
there was a serious drought, and the common people living along the
waterway pounded down a small crossdike here without having ofﬁcial
authorization to do so. This caused all the other crossdikes that let water pass
through them to be put out of operation. Only at this crossdike have the
residents installed a capstan-turned cable without ofﬁcial authorization,
and intercepted those passing through and inﬂicted exactions on them. This
has long been an established rule.
Moreover, there is no alternative route for the coming and going of military vessels, the transport convoys from the salterns, and the inputs and
outputs for the ofﬁcial monopoly wineries,59 not to mention the escort with
documentation of goods from the various tax depots, and the transfer from
the coast by long-distance merchants of their overseas goods from the
south. The branch streams easily run dry. This is indeed an inconvenience.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

179

What is more, there is already the Three-Kilometer Crossdike in this area,
which is adequate to protect the water-control system by closing it off [from
the incursion of salt water, and by limiting outﬂow]. The establishment of
this other dike is superﬂuous, and without question inﬂicts damage. In 1250
a tea-and-wine monopoly ofﬁcial . . . requested the county magistrate to
have it removed by digging it out, so as to beneﬁt the area. The control of
crossdikes falls, however, under the jurisdiction of the town ofﬁcials, whose
duty it is constantly to keep matters under observation and severely repress
the abuse of intercepting trafﬁc and making demands upon it.
The entry stops at this point, but it seems that no action was taken, the town
ofﬁcials in all likelihood being remunerated by the offenders for turning a
blind eye.
Water-control structures took a long period to stabilize. After the Song
dynasty had moved its capital south to Hangzhou (on the frontier of the East
and Southeast) in the second third of the twelfth century, Jiaxing was ﬁlled with
powerful families who had migrated with the government. Many of them
drained lakes and wetlands to make ﬁelds. The military also rebuilt some of the
lake-shore dikes so that they could proﬁt from the ‘barrage ﬁelds’ created inside.
In droughts their needs for water had to be satisﬁed before others could obtain
a share. During periods of ﬂood these barrage ﬁelds are said to have “towered
like peaks” above everything else. They also blocked the outlets to the channels
downstream so making it hard for the common people to drain their ﬁelds.
In the period 1297 to 1307, after the Mongol conquest of south China, a
supervisory ofﬁce was set up to take charge of ‘battalion ﬁelds’, including
determining the boundaries of lakes and preventing the common people from
encroaching any further on them. But, as the gazetteer for the year 1600
comments, “most of those in charge were barbarians and not well versed in
water control.” The farmlands “increasingly deteriorated.” Some time after
1341, efforts were made to remedy matters but as the dynasty came to a close
“polders, banks, locks, and sluices were in a state of total dereliction, and
provided no means of controlling ﬂoods.” If the path of the downﬂow was
cleared “the lake water rushed into the ﬁelds, provoking severe damage.”60
Shallow lakes, like those in Jiaxing, tend to silt up relatively quickly, and even
more quickly if deforestation in their catchment areas increases the load of
sediment in the water. Overall, though, it was human activities that had
converted a regularly ﬂuctuating environment into one of artiﬁcial equilibrium that needed an attentive government and continual maintenance to keep
it under control. Because the ensuing Ming and Qing dynasties came remarkably close to achieving this it is easy to overlook what an effort was involved.

180

Particularities

Land as a scarce resource
At some point in the long-term history of most regions in China there came a
moment when the economic input in shortest supply was no longer laborpower but land. Clearly this moment is difﬁcult to pinpoint, and it differed in
different places, often by many hundreds of years. Moreover, there had probably always been serious competition over the best land. Conversely, even in
well-developed regions it is likely that some poor land that could not be
proﬁtably improved, given existing technology, was never much used or
sought after. Various factors slowed down any convergence to a broadly similar
situation across the empire at any one time. There were economic and
geographical difﬁculties in the way of migration, and social and linguistic
difﬁculties inhibiting settlement among strangers. Physical, immunological,
and technological adaptations were also needed in any new location with a
different terrain, different resources, and different diseases. This general haziness of deﬁnition, and the uneven nature of the process involved across space
and time, in no way means that the change was unimportant. It is likely that it
altered the character of almost every facet of economic and social interaction.
Among other things, it probably fostered an intensiﬁed preoccupation with
landed property.
Undeveloped land was still quite plentiful in Tang-dynasty Jiangnan.61 In
the early part of the dynasty the custom of letting rice-ﬁelds lie fallow in
alternate years still persisted for some time.62 Optimizing the use of land by
transplanting rice seedlings was not practised before Tang times, and then
only came in gradually. Killing weeds by ﬂooding the land was still done in the
early years, as was fertilizing the soil by burning the stubble.63 More efﬁcient
farming techniques began to spread at this time, reducing the average amount
of land needed to support each family. These better methods included the
use of ox-drawn plows and manures, a little double-cropping of rice with
winter wheat, more extensive use of water pumps, and intensifying schedules
of work round the year for peasants.64 The population, as suggested above,
began to increase.
The transition from labor to land as the key scarce component in the
economy seems to have crystallized in Jiaxing in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. The number of registered inhabitants per square kilometer in 980 ce
was 15 (a ﬁgure that is fairly certainly substantially too low). Between 1080 and
1102, it was an average of 84. In 1290 it was 294.65 Thus population density in
Jiaxing’s 7790 square kilometers apparently increased almost twenty-fold in just
over three hundred years, and—much more certainly—by three-and-a-half
times over 199 years. These swollen numbers were mainly fed by an expansion

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

181

of polder land, on which wet-ﬁeld rice could be grown in intensive cultivation,
with increasingly often a dry-land winter crop of wheat or vegetables.
If we turn to qualitative evidence for the nature of the transition, we can at
least illustrate it by contrasting the period when there was sufﬁcient land for
the government to create military agricultural colonies as development enterprises (like that of Zhu Zimian mentioned above), with the later age in which
obsessive legal battles were fought over quite small patches of acreage. The ﬁrst
of these two periods lasted until at least the later part of the Tang. The second
was well established by the end of the twelfth century.
In 304–5 ce the Jin dynasty sent three thousand soldiers to Jiaxing as military
colonists. “With the passing of time the paciﬁcation commissioner had taught
two thousand of these soldiers to farm the ofﬁcial ﬁelds. Every year they had
rich harvests and the public granaries were overﬂowing.”66 To obtain a clearer
impression of what these early colonies may have been like as organizations we
have to move on to the Tang dynasty, half a millennium later. After the rebellions in the middle of the eighth century ce, which inﬂicted fourteen years of
warfare on Jiaxing, there were “famines on this account, made worse by sicknesses and premature deaths. Dead bodies lay exposed to the sky. The dispossessed wandered idly about. Less than a third of the registered population
remained, and not one person in a hundred returned to agriculture. There were
more generals than civilian ofﬁcials, more soldiers than farmers.”67 In 763 or 764
ce the government ordered a high minister of state68 to create military colonies:69
From the lands of Jiaxing he formed twenty-seven colonies. Their areas
twisted this way and that and covered more than 250 square kilometers.70 He
subdivided them into sections demarcated by borders. They were linked
with the sea, and he dredged the ditches between their ﬁelds so that these
were connected with the rivers. He pursued the archaic method of
managing areas far removed from an urban center,71 and put in good order
the administration of the planting and reaping used by the ofﬁcials in
charge of rice cultivation in archaic times.72 The land was cleared by the
removal of weeds, and scraped clean by the extraction of trees, while seeds
were broadcast by means of the breezes, and the roots consolidated by means
of the rain. He propagandized these methods. In the winter they plowed, in
the spring sowed, in the summer weeded, and in the fall harvested. In the
mornings he went on a tour of inspection, and in the evenings gave the
laborers encouragement. There was an appraisal every day and a meeting
every ten days. This was urging them to observe the tasks appropriate to
each of the seasons. The diligent were rewarded and the indolent urged on.
He helped them to ﬁnd marriage partners, and assisted them if they moved

182

Particularities

from farming one ﬁeld to another. He examined their achievements and
reported them to the superior authorities, and transmitted back to his
subordinates the emoluments determined by these superiors.
Read in the context of what we know of later times, this description is startling
in several respects. After allowing for the fact that these military colony lands
were developed as part of a program of recovery from disasters, hence not
typical of normality, and being alerted to an element of idealization indicated
by references to the forms of administration used in the golden age of antiquity, we can note the following points: Land was still relatively easy to secure.
Two hundred and ﬁfty square kilometers was a substantial area in the context
of a prefecture. Simple rice technology, involving no seedbeds or transplanting, with weeding but no fertilizing, and only a single crop a year, without
winter wheat or vegetables, was enough to obtain the harvests “like clouds
covering the skies” referred to in another account of the same system when it
was run by Commissioner Zhu Zimian.73 The basic restructuring of the terrain
was still being undertaken.
This other account also speaks of the “groups of laborers spread out like the
pieces on a ruled board for the game of go, and the ditches and divisions in a
decorated fabric of crisscross patterns.” Most tellingly, since the use of the
phrase in Chinese sources is almost exclusively restricted to accounts from the
early days when irrigation was still something of a novelty, “they made the
ditches serve as their weather.”74 In other words, they had freed themselves from
the need to rely on rainfall. The organization of farming activities was also
directly bureaucratically managed—they were, after all, military colonies—
and in this quite unlike the independent activities of the majority of at least
those peasants who were not in some form of semiservile status under the
middle and later empires.
Society’s attitudes toward farmland after the transition to land shortage can
be inferred from an account written about Jiaxing in 1219 ce by Qian Fu, a
compiler in the Privy Council. It has the title A Record of the Restoration of the
School Fields, that is, ﬁelds whose income was used for supporting Confucian
scholars. A preoccupation had developed with even quite small areas of
productive real estate. The intensity of lawsuits over land at this time may be
taken as an index of this obsession.75
The state [says Qian] has established schools of Confucian learning
throughout the empire. The system is different for large ones and for small
ones. . . . None of them however lacks farmland which is used to ﬁll the
granaries for them. The reason for this is that scholars are taught by instruction, but supported by nourishment. Both of these should be provided, and

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

183

neither should be missing. If there are numerous holes in scholars’ shoes
when they go out of doors, or their supply of grain cannot be maintained
by those in charge of the granary, this is also a matter on which those who
give instruction should bestow their attention.
After this introduction he tells the story of the Jiaxing education ofﬁcer, Xiao
Qi. Xiao commented that “scholars are made content by a full stomach, and
instruction on its own does not allow them to go their own way independently.” Since “not many of the old school-ﬁelds could be traced,” he had had a
town-level education ofﬁcial who was “good at checking accounts” “search for
what had been concealed and pry out what was lurking hidden.”
The most dramatic ﬁnding turned up by this inquiry was the farmland
“occupied under false pretences by the Buddhist monastery of the Six
Harmonies Pagoda.”
Some time previously, the monks of this monastery had deluded a Mr Gu,
who was an imperial bodyguard, and so obtained twenty-eight-and-a-half
hectares of his farmland.76 They had established a contract of sale at a cheap
price that had no foundation in real-life circumstances. What then
happened was that a Mr Xia, a commoner, stated to the authorities that onetenth of this was land that had been ‘mortgaged’ by his family, and that the
monks had no right to talk of it having been ‘sold’.77 He requested the county
magistrate to permit him to redeem it. The magistrate gave his assent to this.
It was through this that the conclusion was reached that the land the monks
had received from Mr Gu had not been lawfully obtained. This was reported
to the prefectural authorities and they, after a fair examination, conﬁscated
it and donated it to the school.
The monks repeatedly went to law over this and repeatedly suffered
setbacks. In particular they maintained that those who had redeemed some
of the ﬁelds were not the descendants of those who had mortgaged them.
The authorities however only gave the redemptors these lands; the
remainder were to stay without question with the school. They assembled
the most learned scholars of the prefecture to effect the transfer. The monks
however did a [covert] deal with the government clerks, and made use of
internal splits [in local society] to keep possession of these lands that had in
principle already been ofﬁcially conﬁscated. They kept them in secret this
way for twenty years. Almost none of those ofﬁcials who supervised the
Confucian scholars looked into this matter, but grew habituated to the
falsehood so that it became as it were the truth.
Only when this concealed state of affairs became entirely obvious was
it reported to the prefectural authorities, the censorate, and the grain-

184

Particularities

transport authorities, for them to act in concert in presiding over the oaths
[of the accused]. These latter authorities punished the criminal acts of the
clerks, and as before returned the land to the school. The monks then foolishly further sued them before the Ministry, and the Ministry likewise found
the monks to be in the wrong. The monks in consequence submitted and
returned all the farmlands that they had received, half of which had been
the result of covert subversion. . . .
These lands are now rid of Buddhists and returned to Confucians. They
are not now used to support vagrants [that is, monks], but commoners of
high quality.78
The anti-Buddhist bias to Qian Fu’s story is patent. Irrespective of this, the
seriousness of the conﬂict over a relatively small acreage (not much more than
0.1 per cent of the area of the colony lands in the preceding example), and the
effort put into the struggle by all sides, suggests the extraordinary importance
that land had acquired by this date. Twenty-eight hectares were enough for a
quarrel eventually to claim the attention of central government ofﬁcials,
including the author of the account just given, who was asked by the locals to
write it up.
There were of course moments when political disorder led to a renewed
availability of more cultivable land than there was labor to work it. Thus the
biography of the recorder of Jiaxing at the beginning of the Ming dynasty79
notes that “many of the ﬁelds had gone to waste and become overgrown; and
he put everything into urging those who had the resources [in labor power or
funds] to open them up.”80
As the dynasty progressed the cities also ﬁlled up; maybe we should say
‘ﬁlled up again’. The late-Ming gazetteer describes this process, which became
apparent during the sixteenth century:81
At the beginning of the Ming dynasty, the dwellings of the commoners in
the prefectural capital were still few in number. To the inside of the four
water gates everything was a grid of large waterways. Boats could be rowed
even along the branch canals. After the early 1520s the population steadily
increased. Houses became aggregated on both sides of the city’s rivers like
the sequences of scales on a ﬁsh. By this time domestic refuse had choked
up the branch canals, and these little by little turned into dry land. Some of
the larger waterways also became clogged with silt, which was a misery for
the residents.
In 1547, the prefect . . . formulated proposals to dredge the city waterways,
which led to the clearing of canals that had become blocked up or had

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

185

disappeared. He put a stop to the encroachment of commoners’ houses into
conﬁned areas. Where the approach ramps to the bridges had caused
congestion with muck, he had them cleared. He also ordered the canton
districts each to send out a boat to carry away the sediments that had been
removed and dump them into the South Lake, so as to build up the base
there for a tower.
In fact it seems likely that the city population had risen during the Southern
Song and then declined again during the troubles both of the Song-to-Yuan
transition and the Yuan-to-Ming transition. For the moment at least, the fragments of evidence that hint at an earlier urban opulence are too slight to allow
us to judge with certainty if this was so.82
Clashes over real estate also related to wood, which was becoming a scarce
resource in some areas during the middle empire. The Song-dynasty gazetteer
for the coastal town of Ganpu tells the tale below following an entry on six of
the hills to the west and northwest of the town:83
Woods are not planted on the six hills just mentioned. They are [unlike
other hills] a place where the common people pasture their cows and
sheep. Earlier the salt-making households and the commoners fought
between themselves over the hills providing ﬁrewood. Lawsuits occurred
from the period of the Five Dynasties until the present Song dynasty, and
imperial judgments were repeatedly issued. People used stone containers
to conceal their land-entitlement documents for safety in the ground.
From two hundred years ago onward it was not determined what belonged to
whom. Every year there were armed clashes in the hills, and people were
continually being killed. In 1184 the granary commissioner . . . examined
the details and organized them in comprehensive form. Whenever he was
out on a mission to handle ofﬁcial business, he regularly used his leisure
moments to collect the opinions of the public. He consulted over what
should be given and what taken away, and deﬁned the boundaries for each
section in a way that he proposed should never thereafter change. He
submitted this to the Emperor, who was delighted, and the ﬁghting
stopped as a result.
What can be glimpsed here is a part of the process, often marked by environmental wars, through which once generally accessible nonagricultural areas,
like woods and hill pastures, were being assigned to particular families and
communities. The need in general to grow trees for timber and ﬁrewood by
this time, which is indicated by the term ‘plant’ at the beginning of this

186

Particularities

extract, is conﬁrmed by a terse comment in the two lines devoted in this
little book to Ganpu’s topography: “On the bare hills the people do not plant
forest trees.”84
The situation was worse by Ming times. In the Song era there had been a
shipbuilding yard at the foot of Longwall Mountains, sometimes called
Sun–Moon Conjunction Mountain, where there was an anchorage known as
the Dragon’s Eye Basin. Building ships implies a supply of timber. Interestingly, the only drinkable water locally available came from a well halfway up
the mountain that had been dug at the initiative of Buddhist monks, and
was indispensable for travelers. In the sixteenth century, Dong Gu, a native
of Haiyan and the compiler of the continuation of the Ganpu town
gazetteer, related a story showing how the shortage of wood had intensiﬁed
by this date:85
Sun–Moon Conjunction Mountain . . . once provided a pillow at its foot for
the Dragon’s Eye Basin. Beside this ship’s anchorage there is a naval station
that is on guard against threats from the open sea outside. There is a temple
halfway up the mountain. . . .
In later times the Dragon’s Eye Basin became blocked up. In 1552 the
island pirates86 pillaged Huangwan and Yanshan87 and threw the northern
part of Zhejiang province into a state of emergency. In 1553 they next
violated Jinshan to the north and invaded as far as Haiyan. The navy kept
guard over Ganpu town on the outer [that is, the seaward] side of the
mountain. Some of their soldiers climbed the mountain and cut down a
cypress tree that stood in front of the temple, in order to make a tiller for
a rudder. The spirit allowed them to do this, but said: “So you have had
the audacity to cut down my cypress! If you sacriﬁce to me, then I will
forgive you!”
They thereupon made plans to renovate the shrine. All of a sudden the
tide struck on the sands and gravels blocking the former anchorage. The
Dragon’s Eye Basin at once became overﬂowing and as deep as it had been
before. When the warships reassembled below the shrine, the winds and the
waves caused them no alarm. The pirates passed by repeatedly after this but
in the end did us no harm. Such was the manifestation of the power with
which this spirit is endowed!
This story implies an absence of good-quality timber in the coastal ranges by
this date. In cutting down the cypress that had survived as a sacred tree
protected by its location in the temple grounds, the marines were committing
what they recognized was an act of sacrilege, though pardonable in a emergency. They were lucky their act of atonement was so generously recompensed.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

187

Bridges
Bridges were essential because fording many waterways was both unpleasant
and dangerous. Around the end of the ﬁfteenth century, Shen Lian wrote these
lines on Yunweng’s Bridge in Pinghu:88
Something as mild as water, how can it so overﬂow
That, at a risky ford, a gourd for support is essential,
Those in the middle of the stream so buffeted that they ﬂoat
And, in panic-stricken terror, yell that their plight is desperate!?
There is a reference here to one of the archaic Odes,89 and, as is often the case
when a poem is being used as evidence, there is no way of knowing how much
the literary reference is affecting the sense of what is being said. It is unlikely
that in the mid-Ming people in fact still used gourds in this way.
Unlike embankments, whose tops also served as roads, bridges allowed
water to pass in and out beneath them, and so did not interfere with irrigation,
drainage, or transport. When the Transverse Bridge in Pinghu collapsed, a
walkway was needed over the creek it had spanned, and so “the locals collected
earth to make a levee.” When a new magistrate arrived two years later he found
this had blocked the streams:
It happened to be hot, dry weather. Every branch stream far and near was
parched and waterless. I made inquiries of the old men, and all around they
called for it to be opened up again. I had it breached as a matter of urgency,
and strictly forbade that it be obstructed. Water was able to come in in large
quantities and no ﬁelds were dried out into cracks. I established a boat to
ferry people across.
A plan to install a lock was later turned down as too expensive, but eventually
a ﬂat stone bridge with three channels under it was erected.90
Stone bridges of the kind that were cheap to erect were vulnerable. Wooden
bridges rotted.91 When the Neighborhood Bridge in Tongxiang was rebuilt as a
ﬂat stone construction, ﬂoods due to sudden torrential rains were able to
demolish it a few months later. The sponsor then had it rebuilt as a stronger
stone-arch bridge, which was much more difﬁcult to put up and much more
expensive.92 By Ming times people were becoming aware that agricultural
development could reduce the space available to ﬂoodwater, and so increase
the pressure on bridges by intensifying the outﬂow through the remaining
channels where they stood. It was observed of the Bridge of a Myriad Tranquillities in Pinghu, for example, that “as the land was increasingly mastered,
water accumulated in ever greater quantities outside the polders, and year by
year the bridge was gradually destroyed.”93

188

Particularities

Bridges were more often matters for community and individual initiatives
than water-control schemes, though at times there might be ofﬁcial
prompting. If there were elements of ‘civil society’ under the middle and later
empires to some degree independent of the state the construction of bridges
would be a good place to look for evidence for both them, and also their limitations. Compare the following two stories, the ﬁrst of Goodluck Bridge and
the second of Dragonsighting Bridge, both in Jiashan county. The ‘dragon’
in the second of these names seems to have been an allusion to the chief
donor’s name, not, as one might suspect, to any belief in the actual sighting of
a dragon.94
Goodluck Bridge In 1341–67, under the Yuan, the richest man in the area
was a certain Zhang Jushan. He sired a son called Jusen, who remained
dumb until the age of eighteen, being unable to speak. A monk, who was
collecting funds to build a bridge, passed by his door. “May I ask what I
should do about my son?” Jushan inquired of him. When the monk paid a
visit to the son to question him, the latter suddenly replied: “Our family
should undertake the completion of this bridge on its own!” Jushan was
overjoyed and contributed the funds to build the bridge. . . . From this
moment Jusen could talk.
A miracle of the morally rational kind favored by most Chinese.
Dragonsighting Bridge The county city was encircled by water. Every city
gate had a wooden bridge by which people came and went, with the exception of the south gate where there was the Dayong Canal. Merchants’ sailing
vessels gathered here morn and night, thick as the scales on a ﬁsh. The boats
with cabins of high-ranking ofﬁcials and visitors of elevated status
confronted one another, vying for precedence. If they bumped into each
other it was easy for them to be smashed. . . . When Li Shihua became
county magistrate of this area [some time in the Ming dynasty], the people
of the county suffered from having to ford here, and reported to him that it
was an urgent matter. He thereupon summoned the local residents [and the
money was forthcoming].
Sometimes the ‘private’ individual would be an ofﬁcial born in the area
concerned, and therefore, by the traditional rule of avoidance, not entitled to
hold ofﬁce there. This was the case in the sixteenth century with Feng Rubi, a
native of Pinghu county, and the bridge at Fuelgathering Mountain Gate and
others. He told the story himself:95
In 1561 . . . I was traveling from Han Dike to the prefectural capital when a
storm of rain and wind arose suddenly. I saw the banks on both sides broken

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

189

into muddy mire. Those who were fording the river, hauling each other
along, were drowned one after the next. I could not bear to watch it. I
returned to use bamboos, timbers, bricks, and stones to repair the levees for
some twenty-eight kilometers. Over the next somewhat more than ten years
they repeatedly collapsed and were as often mended. I became concerned
that this plan was not a long-term solution. I therefore gathered together
materials and workmen, and rebuilt thirty-two stone and wood bridges, and
reconstructed the stone and earth levees in ﬁfteen places. With respect to
matters where I was not adequately endowed, I was obliged to look for help
to other gentlemen who shared my purpose.
In the early Ming, Buddhist monks were still important fundraisers and
organizers for bridges.96 Sometimes this was in self-interest. Toward the end of
the ﬁfteenth century, the late Ming gazetteer tells us of Haiyan:97
To the west of the county capital there is a marsh where the water ponds. It
is known as ‘Bright Lake’. In the middle of the lake there is a small
monastery . . . on both sides of which used to be earthen levees along which
people walked. They repeatedly collapsed. The monks of this monastery . . .
concerted their plans with the leaders of the area to convert the earth to
stone, regarding this as a long-term solution. They made bridges through
the spaces below which the lake water could drain away or swell in, as a
means of removing its position-power.
After the sixteenth century, however, monks seem no longer to have performed
any function in building bridges. The last time may have been the case of the
Dahui Bridge in Haiyan. This seems to have been repeatedly ﬁrst in a functional, and then a nonfunctional, state during one observer’s lifetime, because
of the damage done by the sudden rising of water every year after the spring98
and summer rainstorms. After an unsuccessful ofﬁcial attempt to have the
local water-control leaders mend it, and then the failure of the observer to
do it on his own, the ofﬁcial commissioner for water control in 1550 organized
the local gentry and a monk to collect funds and assemble workers. This was
at last effective.99
Bridges were sometimes important markets or linked to them. Here is an
account of Springtime Bridge:100
All sorts of commodities congregate in our Jiaxing, but nowhere in more
abundance than the east corner of the city wall. The peddlers there are
shrewd and canny in their exchanges. People from far and near rub shoulders with each other and cross paths. Like a rainbow, the bridge spans the
belt of water that cuts the north side off from the south.

190

Particularities

When it was rebuilt, “the method used did not copy that used in the past, but
was that of suspended steps of brick and stone, which were both stronger and
more solid than its predecessor.”101 The wording suggests a stepwise arch.
Three kilometers outside Jiaxing city was the Horseteam Bridge. We are told
that “Lü Taichang thought that it was difﬁcult for the country folk to wade
across to come to market, so he constructed this bridge.”102
Whereas only a handful of bridges seem to have been ﬁrst built under the
Tang and the Song, by the mid nineteenth century the number of bridges in
the prefecture was almost four hundred.103

Environment and crime
A world of waterways was a world in which crime was easy. Criminals could
vanish in no time into the maze of creeks. In the late sixteenth century or the
early seventeenth, Li Rihua, a mandarin who had been born in the prefecture,
therefore proposed that barriers should be put across the junctions of the
more important streams, as they had been earlier, though it is not clear when.
His proposal conveys the character of a world where water communications
shaped human movement more than dry-land routes, and is symptomatic of
a common ofﬁcial Chinese attitude to nature, an enduring determination to
subject it to tight bureaucratic control. Also the sense of frustration at the way
in which institutions and installations alike crumble away if not constantly
supervised.104
Consider [wrote Li] that the walls of Jiaxing’s prefectural capital are encircled on all sides by water, which . . . thereby provides sustenance and wealth.
The water in the larger streams has to be split into many subdivisions and
then has to join once more to ﬂow away, again ﬁnding its way to the larger
streams. These larger streams are removed by the lakes, wetlands, inlets, and
broads, which form a vast expanse reaching for innumerable kilometers.
These are the refuges where bandits from every corner come together, and from
which they emerge, and into which they then disappear.
This is why in Jiaxing prefecture it is not appropriate to take defensive
measures against bandits on the land. It has to be done on the water. Nor is
it right to take preventive measures on the bending waterways of the inner
areas. They have to be blocked at the mouths of the larger rivers, and where
the branch streams hasten to join with these larger rivers. The wider of these
may be several hundred feet across, or ﬁfty or sixty feet. Once bandits have
entered one of these waterway mouths one can anticipate that they will
pillage every homestead within. Once they have made their exit, then the

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

191

vast watery expanses are the bandits’ home territory where, fully laden with
their cargoes and sails bellying in the wind, they can no longer be pursued.
Although the brigands love loot, they must also safeguard their lives.
Brigands in earlier years did not dare to enter the inner areas, but only
robbed solitary travelers on the paths along the dikes in desolate places
without inhabitants. Thus when there are barriers at each river mouth, it is
not easy for them to enter a mouth; and, even if they are able to make an
entry, it is not easy for them to leave by another mouth. A situation where it
is difﬁcult to get out, once one is in, leads to being captured. Are the brigands going to be willing to go lightly to their deaths?
In recent times peace has lasted for so long that everything has decayed.
Not one of the barriers at the mouths of the rivers still survives. The excuse
for this is that establishing barriers and closing off a waterway with chains
is only to be done under the bridges in the city. The diameter of the cylindrical wooden crossbar in such cases does not exceed a foot, and it is no
more than twenty feet in length. Even if there are chains as well, they are not
strong. Furthermore, the authorities have selected some of those in poverty
and distress among the lowest category of the registered population, and
forcibly assigned them to be barrier-keepers. This is merely obstructing the
movement of small boats within a locality, and, as it happens, providing a
means for the keepers to make extortionate demands. What advantages are
there in this as a plan for defense? If major bandits turn up, then, once their
axes have been applied, these barriers are instantly cut to pieces; and one
would have done better to rely on a strand of hair!
It would be appropriate at the present time to send out ofﬁcials to ﬁnd out
in every quarter where the smaller rivers join with the larger ones. Four or
ﬁve serried rows of pilings should be hammered in on both sides of these
mouths. Care should be taken that the trees used are large, rough, and sturdy.
Between them a way through should be left, with a gate of one or two
sections to permit the passage of boats. The gate should only be opened wide
for vessels on which ofﬁcials are traveling, and for [ofﬁcial] transport boats.
For all other vessels space should only be made for one vessel at a time. A
massive iron chain should be opened and closed morning and evening.
Wealthy people who live in the neighborhood should be assigned the duty of
providing for labor and rations of food, according to how well off they are.
As in the past, residences for ofﬁcials should be installed in the space on
either side of the barrier so they can live there and be in charge. This will
make it easier to keep watch over it.
Wherever there is a bridge, as in the past a transverse boom will be installed,
and be opened and closed according to a timetable. Once this is done, even if

192

Particularities

major robbers are able to chop down a barrier and get in, and those
guarding the barrier lack the strength to resist them, these latter will make
speed along the land route to the next line of defense, and call together those
who live in the area as a means of resisting the brigands. What is more, a
military vessel should be assigned to important river mouths with barriers,
and will ﬁre cannon, and go out on patrol. . . .
The end of the story is not given. It is doubtful if anything was in fact done.

Food supplies
Many parts of Jiaxing were not self-sufﬁcient in food supplies under the late
middle empire and the late empire. People there earned much of their income
from waterborne trade, by boiling brine to make salt, by cultivating mulberry
trees and rearing silkworms, or by growing cotton. Extra food in such cases
had to be bought from merchants. The pattern was a mosaic of microenvironments and micro-histories. Around Zhapu, which had formed out of a
conglomeration of coastal villages in Song and Yuan times, there was, for
example, a different situation on each side of the town:105
To its west the people live by making salt. The sound of the salt-boiling
caldrons can be heard for more than ten kilometers. There is quite some
quantity of surplus land. One’s gaze is everywhere ﬁlled with reeds and
rushes. They do not farm. To its north, there is a plain whose ﬁelds connect
with Pinghu county, but only a few of the people who have rice come to
Zhapu; all of them go to Pinghu. Only to the south and east are there several
hundreds of thousands of mou of farmland, and only near to Zhapu are the
ﬁelds fertile, yielding a zhong per mou each year. Its trade is in contact with
other places. Zhapu’s lifeline depends entirely on it. In times of peace it is still
possible to avoid shortages, but the moment there are alarms, the rice takes
up its dwelling far away in the hills.
The zhong was not routinely used in later mid-imperial times, and it is impossible for the moment to determine an equivalent in Western measure.106
Rural insecurity was linked to the ﬂuctuations in the harvest caused mainly
by the weather. Low yields of grain meant high prices, and high yields low
ones. This may seem predictable, but it should not be forgotten that when a
system of long-distance transport and marketing is well developed, even in
premodern times, this can damp down or even remove these ﬂuctuations.
Robert Marks has shown that this is what happened in Guangdong province

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

193

(in the Far South) in the later eighteenth century.107 Wu Hongji’s stele inscription on the ‘Ever-Normal Granaries’ of Jiaxing describes the situation in the
prefecture at the end of the sixteenth century. These granaries were responsible
for buying and storing grain in years of plenty and selling it at an affordable
price in years of shortage. They constituted a sort of ‘bureaucratic buffer’.108
I have observed the [varying] abundance of the harvests in Jiaxing. If grain
is plentiful, then everyone hurries to market to sell it. If there are numerous
sellers and few buyers, the price drops lower and lower but the people are
obliged to sell because they are suffering from a lack of money. This harms the
farmers. In years of poor harvests the grain is in short supply, so everyone
hurries to market to buy it. When buyers are many but sellers few, the price
rises higher and higher. If the price rises higher and higher, people are even
so obliged to buy, as they are suffering from a lack of grain. This harms the
people [as consumers].
At times such as these, it is possible to bring it about that damage is done
neither to the farmers nor to the people, that in years of glut the farmers are
not tossed away as worth no more than shit, but in years of dearth the poor
people are not compelled to get their grain as if it were as costly as pearls or
jades. [In other words, keeping ofﬁcial reserves of grain.] . . .
On another occasion I heard the elders say: “In 1561, we were oppressed
by dark fogs, and frogs perched on the stoves and caldrons. More recently
we have seen how in the drought of 1588, as far as the eye could see, the
dry-land grain was like scrubland bushes. In these two years, the annual tax
obligations were not paid in; those suffering from famine looked at each other,
and sold off their wives and children as if they were pigs or deer. Even so, the
white bones piled up. How about if use had been made of the method of
planning in advance and laying in reserve stocks, to give these people a pint
or a peck of grain? . . .
In the last ﬁve years the authorities have likewise been concerned with
this ancient strategy that ensures that low prices do not hurt farmers and
high prices do not hurt consumers. The command has been received to
establish Ever-Normal Granaries in every prefecture and county, in readiness for years of bad harvest, and to take charge of buying in and selling
grain. Hence I have been able to observe, within my limited sphere, the
setting up of these granaries within a single county.
Let me go systematically around the towns of the county. Some thirteen
or more kilometers to the north is Wangjiang Creek, where the people have
to go to Suzhou for their [major] market. There are ten farmers there for
every three traders. Ninety per cent of them suffer from ﬂoods, but only ten
per cent from droughts. Their land is suitable for rice and there is little

194

Particularities

wheat. Yields are almost double those of the high-lying land, but ﬂoods
damage the rice and cause famines. A granary has been established there, in
the middle of the market. It faces south and is square in shape. . . . Its size,
if one measures the dimensions at right angles to each other, is 300 xun.
Rather less than ﬁfteen kilometers to the southwest of the county capital
is Newtown, whose people have to go to market at Tiao River. For every ten
farmers there are four traders. They suffer to an equal extent from drought
and from ﬂooding. Their ﬁelds are suited to wheat, rice, and mulberry trees.
Compared to those of the level and swampy areas their yields are extremely
meager. Both drought and ﬂoods damage their wheat and rice, and so cause
famine. Their granary is in the middle of the market, close to the ofﬁcial
highway, facing south and rectangular in shape.
And so he continues round the rest of the county towns.
The xun was a length of 8 Chinese feet. Since the Ming foot used for
building purposes averaged 31.9 centimeters,109 a xun was about 2.55 meters. It
seems that the ﬂoor area was about 766 square meters, which implies that the
walls would have been about 28 meters in length. The text also indicates that
the building was divided into two halves, with a narrow passageway running
between them, and further subdivisions.
The erection of such massive buildings, and the operation of the administration needed to buy, store, and sell grain, were part of the costs of coping
with the combination of variable weather and a sophisticated but precarious
system of cereal production vulnerable to these variations. The sale of children
in times of distress was one of the key markers of the increasing lack of
resilience, linked to the disappearance of a natural environmental buffer.

Natural disasters
Famines, and ﬂoods, and droughts in early imperial times on the whole affected
smaller numbers of people than under the middle or late empire. Some time
between 107 and 125 ce, the magistrate of Wuyuan (that is, roughly, Haiyan)
opened the granaries when there was a famine and “saved the lives of three
hundred households.”110 That means about 1,500 individuals. Compare these
numbers with those in the biography of Hong Hao, who was the paymaster of
Xiuzhou (approximately, Jiaxing) some time between 1119 and 1125:111
There were heavy ﬂoods and the common people suffered from famine. In
order to relieve the scarcity he took on his own responsibility the decision
to open up the ofﬁcial granaries, and reduce prices. He displayed banners in

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

195

the markets proclaiming that no one was to dare to sell grain at a high price.
For those who could not feed themselves he had rice-gruel boiled to feed
them. He established rooms in two abandoned temples, one in the east and
one in the south of the city, sheltering ten persons per room, and with men
and women lodged in separate places. He had their hands marked with a
black spot to prevent any of them cheating [to get double rations].
At that moment 40,000 hu of grain tribute rice from the southern part of
the Liang-Zhe [on the East/Southeast border] were passing through the city
[on the Grand Canal], bound for Kaifeng [in the Northeast]. He sent down
orders that they were to be intercepted and retained for relief. When permission for this was denied, Hao declared: “I prefer to exchange my own person
for ten thousand lives,” and actually retained the grain. When the commissioner conducting the inquiry into this came to know the circumstances he
submitted a memorial that Hao’s crime should be pardoned and more grain
sent to the capital. From start to ﬁnish Hao saved the lives of more than
95,000 people.
Compared to a thousand years earlier, the scale of disaster relief extensive
enough to be thought worth recording had risen by an order of magnitude.112
The episode just related was not so extraordinary as to give a misleading
impression. This is conﬁrmed by other information in the late-Ming gazetteer.
For example, Yang Jizong, a late-ﬁfteenth-century ofﬁcial celebrated for his
integrity and frugality, and who served on and off as the prefect of Jiaxing for
nine years, is said to have stockpiled “several million hu” of grain. “In the great
famine of 1467 and 1468, the people of the prefecture relied on this to preserve
their lives.” In a later famine, these reserves, depleted by being sent to other
stricken areas, were even so insufﬁcient.113

Superfauna
Other beings inhabited the Jiaxing landscape besides plants, birds, ﬁsh, insects,
and animals. These were the creatures of the human mind: dragons, the spirits
of the departed, and deities. They have to be remembered if we are to have
a complete sense of how the environment was experienced by those who lived
in it.
In the fall of 1283 magistrate Gu Yong wrote the following account of the
Dragon Lord Shrine on Mount Chen in Haiyan county:114
It is the place where one prays for rain when there is a year of drought. It was
ﬁrst founded in the Song dynasty by county magistrate Li Zhiyang . . . and

196

Particularities

had long fallen in ruin. . . . It is in fact where a white dragon gives rise
to rain. . . .
In the sixth moon of 1282 the Drought Demon was cruel. The farmers
looked at each other and waited to die. On the ﬁrst day of the tenth moon I
went in urgency to Mount Chen and prayed as follows: “Today it is not only
the farmers who have no hope. More than seventy-ﬁve thousand piculs of
grain115 are still due from us to the Court as the ‘fall sprouts quota’ rent for
public lands.”116 I had barely spoken when ranks of clouds darkened the
skies and a copious rain fell.
After a day had passed, the Milky Way shone gloriously bright and
people’s hearts became as fearful as on the day before. Consequently I led
the ofﬁcials and my friends among the scholars, together with Buddhists,
Daoists, and elders, to pray a second time at the shrine. Now it should be
said by way of explanation that on several days I had gone to Mount Chen
to present my requests to the Dragon Pool [in which the Dragon lived], and
had obtained clear manifestations in return for my salutations. Long previously I had obtained a True Seal117 from the Daoist adept Feng. I therefore
went to my private ofﬁce and used it as an additional technique to summon
lightning and thunder, so as to assist the spiritual powers of the dragon, and it
actually rained! The common people were overjoyed, and there was enough
moisture for the harvest that year to be a bumper crop.
In the ﬁfth moon of 1283 there was still a drought. I went to the shrine as
I had before and there prayed tirelessly with increased devotion. There was
a downpour for two days. The common people still hoped for more and
were not yet content. I prayed again and once more summoned lightning.
The following night it rained as if a bowl had been turned upside down, and
the people’s hopes were comforted. . . .
On the twenty-second day of the seventh moon . . . I sent artisans to paint
pictures of the Dragon Lord for him [in the partially restored temple]. In
less than a moment there came a ﬂash of lightning, with winds. The Great
Dragon Lord appeared, and then a smaller dragon also appeared. It looked
exactly as if a father and son were present. They rose and once they had risen
there was a full foot of rain. At that time Shen Yu, who is a man of this
county, the elder Sun Shimai, the Daoist master Ye Shichun, and others
there, all collectively saw them with countless eyes. Every one of them was
terriﬁed. I have served the Dragon Lord to my utmost, and the Dragon Lord
has rewarded me with no small recompense.
As is shown in chapter 11 it was common for groups of people to see dragons
until at least the seventeenth century.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

197

A different kind of spiritual force manifested itself at the Temple of the Lady
of the Stalagmite.118 The temple was ﬁrst built between 1265 and 1274. It was
rebuilt in 1520 by a holder of the metropolitan degree, so the faith was still
sufﬁciently alive at this time to prompt ﬁnancial support from a member of
the ofﬁcial class. There is an account by a local called Zeng Bing which suggests
that the process of the disenchantment of nature began by the middle of lateimperial times:119
About 1265 ce, ﬁve kilometers to the southeast of the prefectural capital, a
stone sprang up that was like a bamboo shoot. The people round about
thought that it was uncanny, and hence they called the building housing it
the ‘Stalagmite Temple’. . . .
In 1452 it was reconstructed, and for several hundred years down to the
present, as if but a single day has passed, it has created good fortune and
brought down happiness. Fathers and old men and boys, together with old
village women and widows living in the back country, pray to it concerning
bumper harvests and years of dearth; they communicate with it about ﬂoods
and droughts, and they give it their requests about sicknesses. They are
answered with the reliability of an echo. From far and near people vie with
each other to hasten to it in a continuous line, as if it were a market.
But, Zeng asks, do natural objects really have magical properties, and if so, in
what sense?
For it to be able to be like this, and for a stone actually to possess magical
properties, would be particularly uncanny! In people’s opinions, things
which are frequently seen in the world are called ‘commonplace’, while
things but rarely seen are treated as uncanny, but they are not intrinsically
uncanny. Nor are they intrinsically magical. It is simply that people’s minds
make them uncanny and so see them as magical. Thus what is weird is seen
as magical and what is magical as the work of spirits.
‘Spirits’ are the minute germinal causal elements in matter–energy–
vitality!120 The Transforming Force ﬂows through them, contracting and
extending, opening and closing, with a uniquely perfect and magical quality.
When they are concentrated in human beings, even in married women or
girls, they endow them with a nature that is uniﬁed and well-balanced. Thus
these last-mentioned can maintain chastity and ﬁdelity to a single husband.
When these forces have accumulated pent-up for a long time between
two points in space or time, the active essence becomes brilliantly apparent,
lasting as long as famous mountains or great rivers. It is indeed what one
calls ‘existing without having been born, and disappearing without having
died’. Who could maintain that a twisted stone that dribbles water does not

198

Particularities

belong to the category of ‘mountains and streams’?121 This being so, this
stalagmite’s magical powers can increasingly awaken in our human minds
the germinal causes of feelings of respect and reverence, whereby we can see
the abundance of the virtuous powers of the shades and spirits. These are
indeed in this stone, but also they are not really in it.
Thus some members of the educated minority tried to make rational philosophical sense of the seeming miracles that ordinary folk encountered in their
daily lives. Others, however, like the author of a poem that follows the account
just given, were quite certain that “the land does indeed possess feelings and so
gave birth to the Lady of the Stalagmite, using the medium of the stone for her
to become a spirit.”122
The increased spread of the vision of a ‘disenchanted’ nature among the elite
in the last centuries of the imperial age was thus both incomplete and not
always clear-cut. If one reads through materials covering a long span of time,
however, the evidence for this trend seems relatively persuasive. The most
striking example known to me is the lives of virtuous women recorded in local
gazetteers. For Song and Ming times, miracles associated with virtue are
comparatively common. In accounts from the Qing they almost totally disappear. We will return to the complexities of this theme in chapter 12 on the
interplay between virtue and the weather, and the multiplicity of different
personal perspectives.
One way or another, nature sent messages. The line here between what we
would classify as the ‘natural’ and the ‘supernatural’ was a ﬁne one. Two short
tales about Zhou Xin, who lived early in the ﬁfteenth century, and was posthumously canonized as the City God, implicitly make this point:123
(1) He was appointed to be the provincial judge for Zhejiang. When he ﬁrst
reached the boundary of the province he saw swarms of gnats ﬂying about
his horse’s head. He followed them to a thicket and there found the corpse
of a man who had died a violent death. There were also a key and a small
notebook recording transactions. “He was a cloth merchant,” Xin declared.
He took up the body and the other items. When he arrived at his post, he
sent men into the markets, there to examine the lengths of cloth one by one.
In all the cases where the cloth corresponded to that recorded in the notebook, he had the sellers detained, and found the robbers by means of interrogation. He then summoned the members of the family of the dead man
and presented them with the cloth.
(2) Xin was sitting in his courtroom when a swirling gust of wind blew a leaf
toward him. He marveled at this, and those in attendance on him said that
the tree from which it came did not grow in the city. The only place that had

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

199

it was a temple a considerable distance away. “Have the monks of this temple
then killed someone?” asked Xin. When he went there he found the corpse
of a woman beneath the tree.
The ﬁrst of these invokes only natural causes and Zhou’s powers of observation and detection. But the second?
A belief in geomantic effects occasionally surfaces in the local histories.
‘Geomancy’ is the art or pseudo-science of manipulating the occult forces that
are believed to run through a landscape, site, house, or even room. This is
effected by altering the presence, position, alignment, or character of the
objects in them, such as buildings, graves, and furnishings, in such a way that
their impact on particular human lives and fortunes is altered. A Western
partial parallel is the belief in the effects of ley-lines. Two comments made in
the late-Ming gazetteer illustrate the theme:124
(1) Some time after 1573 people recklessly excavated a hole in the eastern wall
of the prefectural capital, built a bridge, and altered the ﬂow of the water in
the moat. In 1597 the prefecture did not have a single success in the imperial
examinations. In the winter of this year, Zheng Zhenxian, the county magistrate,125 had the bridge demolished and the gap ﬁlled in. In 1600126 eight
candidates were successful, so that all at once we could be said to have been
doing well.
(2) At that time127 the school for Confucian scholars was located in an outof-the-way spot. The ‘aether–energies in the human and physical atmospheres’ in the western part of the prefectural capital city [where it was
presumably situated] were not concentrated, and so successes in the examinations for the second and third degrees were few and far between.128
An awareness of the Chinese sense of the intimate geomantic interconnections
between what we would tend to think of as the material and the mental is what
makes these two passages comprehensible.

Gentry representations
Our response to the landscape poetry of the middle and the late empire is
altered by an awareness of the changes sketched in the preceding sections. The
unremitting transformation of the natural world by generations of human
intervention has left it no longer ‘nature’ but something else: a human–natural
condominium. The lingering presence of local supernatural forces in the
streams and mountains still gives them a magic; but in a tension with human

200

Particularities

activities. The remembered past conferred a resonance on particular localities,
and a mournful but exalting psychological distance from the more prosaic
present. Even under the later empire the remembrance of archaic times
continued to haunt the landscape. Thus the Stateline Bridge that crossed the
boundary between the preimperial states of Wu and Yue, once a battleground,
inspired the Qing poet Mu Suiwu to write:129
Scattered and bleak on either bank, the reed-tufts’ heights are the same,
As the sun’s rays sink in the west, the wasteland weeds are a blur.
As I cross the bridge in the wilds that once divided two states,
Sorrowing still, in the wind from the north, the horses’ cries can be heard.
The people of these two states, especially Yue, were known in the preimperial age
for their ferocity in war. It is a curiosity of history that the populations who were
their successors had the reputation in later times of being exceptionally lacking
in military character. One biography of a local man engaged in organizing resistance to the so-called ‘Japanese pirates’ in the sixteenth century observed: “The
men of Zhejiang are also soft and timid, being unaccustomed to ﬁghting.”130
The precarious, and not always successful, struggle of ordinary people to
survive was in silent, ever-present, contrast with the momentary ease of the
gentry writers and their partial emancipation from the world of necessity.
Saying this is not to deny the sense of social obligation that often moved
scholars and ofﬁcials, but only to put their privileged position into context.
Privilege brought its different pains: the stresses of ofﬁcial life, and the suave
but merciless interpersonal warfare among the elite. These discomforts often
underlie a yearning for escape into nature, either practical or metaphysical.
Nature was a therapy for exposure to too much humanity. As Fan Yan wrote:
“When one climbs to a high place, then public business is ﬁnished.”131 For, as
Su Zai put it, more symbolically:132
No cage-incarcerated bird forgets what it was to ﬂy,
The horse, though tethered, ever dreams that he is galloping wild.
There follows a mosaic of quotations that compose a picture of Jiaxing’s countryside as seen through gentry and ofﬁcial eyes.
Here, to set the scene is a poem from the Yuan dynasty, “In a boat at Blackforest,” by Sa Duci, a bureaucrat addicted to traveling through scenic places:133
Wild duck, along the spring rills, are plump enough now to shoot,
Hill partridge, in woods off the beaten track, chirp from the deep shade,
Tourists, in their pleasure-craft, pass by in the third moon,
Season when catkins dance on the willows, but apricot blossoms have
faded.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

201

Forests, too, that rise to the clouds, and bamboos in repetitive rows,
While homesteads, then the shacks of monks, one after another pass by.
Though I hold a modest ofﬁcial post, my desire is still to go home,
But from where can I borrow the funds to buy a hill to retire to?
Sa’s longing is for a this-worldly escape. “Going up with my friends to the
Vāirōtchana Buddha Pavilion at the end of spring,” written in Ming times by
Xiang Yuanqi, a poet, calligrapher, and connoisseur of paintings,134 is an evocation of the longing for a spiritual escape mediated through landscape:135
Climbing up to the sumptuous lookout kiosk, there spreads an unbroken
view;
We glance a thousand fathoms down, while unmoving mists glow like
cinnabar,
And, repeatedly, rich and varied scents greet us from different blooms,
Or, pure as a chiming stone, a sound — sometimes echoes across the
distance.
Round the city, its coiling moat-stream — looks like the belt on a garment;
Out on the sea, a mantle of sunshine turns all the islands to gold;
Our world-pity, stirred by this scene, has opened Lord Buddha’s park;
Inspiration borrowed from spring blowing past, we talk of the Way a
moment.
The phrase ‘Lord Buddha’s park’ refers to the park of the king of Śravasti in
which legend has it that there stood the Jetavāna monastery, one of the favored
resorts of Śākyamuni. The Chinese found a special inspiration in going up to
a high point, and did this at certain times of the year, notably the ninth day of
the ninth moon.
The second of the Ten Songs on Jiaxing by Shen Yaozhong, also in the Ming,
mixes the real world and superfauna with no sense of incongruity:136
The transparent moat-stream winds its embrace round a bend in the city
wall.
What end do its whirling eddies serve, in their Five True Colors’ beauty?
Wishing to peer with the magic Horn Torch into the depths of its waters,
But, fearing to startle the spirit beings, I remain irresolute.
The ‘Five True Colors’ of ancient times were blue-green, yellow-brown, red,
white, and black, and regarded as primary as contrasted with intermediate.
They were assigned to the Five Phases of Matter. The rhinoceros Horn Torch
was a device said to have been lit by Wen Jiao, a general and ofﬁcial of the early
fourth century ce, so he could see the uncanny denizens in the darkness of the
Yangzi River.

202

Particularities

In Ming and Qing times, these poems on local scenes—one could almost
call them ‘postcards in words’—seem often to incorporate a feeling for the
economics, communications, hydraulics, and even the political power at work
on a landscape. Shortly after the building of the Paceclouds Bridge in 1478, for
example, the well-known Jiashan literary ﬁgure Zhou Ding wrote the
following lines on it:137
In the isolated hamlet that has now become a market,
With two or three pavilions where wine is sold and quaffed,
The bridge holds it all together, and stands in midstream adamant,
While, on differing routes between the ﬁelds, the paths lead off aslant.
Flowing through, unrufﬂed, comes the broad sweep of the inlet,
Where the Stone Well Embankment has stopped the deposited silt.
Just as the sun is setting, the ﬁshtail oar falls still,
And looming high, when one looks west, rise the capital’s walls in the
distance.
I have supplied the word ‘ﬁshtail’ as this was the type of oar most commonly
used. The person propelling the boat (in all likelihood not the poet) stood near
the back, facing forward, and agitated the blade of the oar, whose long curving
arm was held in a raised rowlock, in a back-and-forth feathering motion over
the stern. This had an effect similar to that of a screw.
In the Qing dynasty many poets’ sense of rural work became more and
more deeply interfused with their aesthetic vision. Here, by way of illustration,
are some lines by Cheng Ruiyue on “Anchoring at Wangjiang Creek”:138
The boat swings athwart the country inlet. The bright sands spread out level.
Rising up through the cool, the jade-like moon makes the shadows more
sharply deﬁned.
The lantern reﬂects in the ripples; ﬁreﬂies ﬂit like random specks.
Gulls and wild ducks on the opposite bank are soundless in nighttime
silence.
People linger still to pluck the leaves in these numerous groves of
mulberries.
Many acres of lakeﬁelds wait for the rain, before the plows score them
with furrows.
A ‘lakeﬁeld’ was a former lake that had been drained and turned into a ricepaddy. An awareness of labor—perhaps one should say more speciﬁcally, ‘of
other people’s labor’—was now part of the appreciation of landscape. And the
landscape itself was in large measure a human creation: dredged creeks, cultivated trees, diked and leveled ﬁelds.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

203

On the edge
The life of the less fortunate was tough. Our evidence for this has of course
been shaped by literary conventions, usually developed as a form of protest
against inept or cruel ofﬁcial policies. Poems on poverty, on the suffering
resulting from harsh weather, or excessive taxation, and on the sale of peasants’
wives and children into whoredom and servitude, were in a sense genre pieces.
Just as, in a different way, the verbal picture postcards were. But it was a repetition that also happened in fact. A cliché is not necessarily the less true for
being familiar.
How then do we ﬁnd a balance between texts that talk of horror and those that
depict prosperity? The case will be made here that both are true. The ﬁrst depicts
extreme events. The second average events. In normal years peasants coped—
indeed, even did moderately well at times—by means of ingenuity and extremely
hard work. When things went wrong, though, there was virtually no longer any
environmental resilience in the system. No wild foods, no forests in which to
hunt or gather, no ﬁsh or other accessible resources not already put out of
bounds by others’ prior rights of private property. In addition to the bureaucratic
buffer described earlier that was sometimes available there was also a useful if
limited economic resilience in the system. This was the result of the increasingly
well-developed marketing network. For all its effectiveness in shifting goods to
where demand was most urgent, and hence sale the most likely to be proﬁtable,
it usually needed some stock of reserves to access it, both by buyers and sellers—
credit, cash, collateral, or an inventory. In other words, most peasants and small
traders were obliged to live ‘on the edge’. A not inconsiderable number went over
all the time. More in years of drought, ﬂooding, or locusts.
“The Song of an Inspector of Fields” by Yuan Jie139 belongs to a well-known
genre of stories of misfortune: an encounter with an informant, who recounts
his or her history to the poet in a retrospective panorama. This piece refers to
Huating county, which was part of Xiuzhou (approximately Jiaxing) in the
Song and part of the Yuan dynasty.140 The ‘Yellow Inlet’ is the Huangpu, later
famous as the river on which Shanghai was situated. The date of the drought
is 1320. The reference to ‘ofﬁcial ﬁelds’ is a reminder that in this part of China,
from late Song to well into the Ming dynasty, the state was the owner of large
areas of farmland, where taxes were higher than elsewhere because they
contained an added component of rent.
An old gentleman made his appearance, like the onset of a disease,
Wearing a shabby, tattered robe, and scrawny and thin as a devil.
At daybreak he’d prop himself up, at the side of the principal street,
Begging passers-by in piteous tones for rice or a handful of pennies.

204

Particularities

At that time I’d received my commission — to leave for Jiangcheng in the
south.
When I met with him unexpectedly, the sight at once made me feel sorry,
So, to give him ﬁve pints of my rice, I had my sack tipped upside down,
Then attempted to ask him the reason he was so afﬂicted with poverty.
After this the old man responded — to the question that I had given him:
“Li the Fifteenth is my name. My home’s in the Eastern District.
Our family was poor. We’d no funds — to set ourselves up in business.
Five acres of ofﬁcial land was all we engaged in tilling.
“In the seventh year of the Yanyou reign, at the start of the third month,
We sold our clothes to buy a plow, and a hoe for cultivating.
Mornings we tilled, and evenings weeded. — Great bitterness we suffered
To pay back the private debts we owed, and the rent due to the
government.
“Who could have foretold, in the sixth month, and the month following
that,
Rain would be totally absent, with no movement in the tides?
If we’d had our wish for a single drop, even half a drop, to spatter
It would have been worth no less than the blood that reddened the farmers’
eyes.
“The Yellow Inlet, once smoothly ﬂowing, became like a ditch or gutter;
Peasants’ families fought over water as though pearls were at stake in their
struggle.
If several pumpings were tried in succession, the water would not be
enough,
And overnight our paddy-ﬁelds turned — into sediments, and mud.”
Catastrophe followed. The ‘tribute grain’ mentioned in the last verse but one
below was grain levied to be sent to the capital to provision the troops there
and meet other government needs.
“That year a difference in height determined good or bad luck.
Wasted lay all the upland ﬁelds, while those below grew grain.
County bureaucrats, blind to the fact that the higher ﬁelds were dried up,
Adjudged that ﬁelds at both levels should be treated just the same.
“Swift as ﬂames to the countryside came down the claims for tax,
Coercing us to pay our dues before the other farmers.
Since we’d no desire to be ﬁrst, they then worked off their anger
By treating every one of our ﬁelds as if it had had a full harvest.

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

205

“Their granaries opened in advance, as crops ripened in early fall,
But we, who’d to pay tax ﬁrst, were too poverty-stricken to have it.
I had a son, then, named A-sun, and A-xi, who was my daughter.
They compelled me to sell her in marriage, to help meet the ofﬁcial
exactions.
“A-sun I sold off to a family who transported the tribute grain.
I know of no place where, once again, he might be before my eyes.
It’s sad, too, that A-xi, still not old enough even to be engaged,
Went off to the mountains near Huzhou, there to become a bride.
“Being this year, as it happens, more than seventy years old,
I have no food when hungry; nor have I clothes when cold.
I ask this way, then beg that, already beyond my last breath.
Before long, I shall make my way back — to the Yellow Springs of Death.”
The Yellow Springs were the archaic Chinese underworld, where the shades of
the dead lived, before the introduction of Buddhist and Daoist paradises and
purgatories.
The point is not that the story this poem tells is heartbreaking, but that it is
commonplace. There are too many poems about the need of the poor to sell
their children in hard times for it to be possible to dismiss this as just a conventional literary exaggeration.141
The same theme is taken up in Yuan Huang’s “Farmer’s Song,” probably
written in the late sixteenth century.142 The ‘lily-like plants’ he mentions were
Nymphoides peltata, a waterweed that sometimes served as a famine food. In
Ming times, ‘serfs’ were only meant to be in the service of ofﬁcials, but this ban
was often disregarded. The description of imperial favor as rich dew is an allusion to the Scripture of Songs.143 The ‘fallen leaves’ are presumably lost children.
Outside the town in the springtime, where gray water runs in the river,
I pass by, under dull gray clouds, hearing tears in every doorway.
Each gate is chained shut in the daytime; smoke no longer plumes up from
the kitchens,
And this way and that, in every valley, lie the skeletons as they have fallen.
In the year just passed, in the middle of summer, there were numerous
rains and storms.
In place after place, the reed-thatched houses fell into the great whales’
maws,
And it seemed as if the sky was ﬂoating, outside Suzhou’s walls,
While lily-like plants and lotus-leaf buds are our ‘grain’ in the springtime
shortage.

206

Particularities

That family there had a girl, who was delicate in her beauty;
This family here had a son, whom they cherished like jade in importance;
But the seasons of Heaven and human doings were both of them in
confusion.
The son now toils as a serf. Their daughter, they sold into whoredom.
Bondage violates human nature. So, too, does prostitution.
Deep runs the springtime hatred in the countless homes that are ruined.
Profound, and vast as the sea, is our present Dynasty’s goodness,
But when will the favor of Its dew be moistening these woods?
In their grief for the fallen leaves, the countryfolk share their bitterness.
Their savings reduced to bits and pieces, they have trouble in making a
living.
The plows are still not back on the job, although the rains have ﬁnished.
So they hack with hoes at the horse-fodder beans now clambering over
their lintels.
Yuan then implies that the population has so diminished that “a cry or a footfall is as precious as gold.” The looms are silent at night. He only hears owls
hooting. His ﬁnal lines warn the upper classes who are safely “lodged in the
lofty heights,” and “either folding their hands or drumming with their ﬁngers,”
not to be indifferent. Reﬂect, he says, “what Azure Heaven might do to you.”144
Joachim Radkau has referred to the image of China among geographers and
environmental historians as “extremely contradictory.” It has been both “a
model and a horror story.”145 Both views have elements of truth. The one
correction needed for the ‘model’ view is that most economic success was
based on unrelentingly hard work, especially for women. Some time toward
the end of the Yuan dynasty, or perhaps in the early Ming, Wang Mian wrote
a poem on this theme. Later celebrated as a painter of plum trees, Wang came
from a poor family. He had once run off to study rather than look after the
cows with which his father had entrusted him. (It earned him a ﬂogging.) One
of his literary names was ‘The Mountain Farmer Who Boils Stones’. He knew
what he was talking about.
He begins by mentioning the women’s torn skirts, bare feet, unkempt hair,
and their “faces like the earth,” and then goes on to note that:146
During the daytime they labor in the ﬁelds, following their husbands, and
then, during the night, they spin hemp. They do not go to bed. The hemp
they have spun is made into cloth which is used to meet that part of the
ofﬁcial tax levied in cloth. The rice won by their toil in the ﬁelds goes into
the ofﬁcial granaries. So long as payments to the ofﬁcials have not been
completed, they suffer from pent-up depression. Outside their doors they

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

207

also hear people who have come to prompt them to pay private debts.
Everyone borrows against pledges, and fresh grain may not be paid back in
full even after ten years have passed. When an eldest son reaches ﬁve
Chinese years of age,147 they have to part with him, since his younger sister,
aged three full years, cannot leave home in this way. When the community
headman calls out the roster of names, he breaks up households, since two
more persons will thus be added to the quota of ofﬁcial tax-grain due the
next season.
Hemp’s day was nearly over at this date, however. During the Ming dynasty
there was a botanical revolution. Hemp, which produced a fabric much like
linen, was largely replaced by cotton as a clothing ﬁber. Cotton was preferred
because it was warmer, lighter, and better at absorbing moisture. It also grew
about ten times as much ﬁber per hectare as hemp. The cotton plant’s tolerance of the mildly salty conditions down the east coast of the area south of the
mouth of the Yangzi gave rise to a seaside strip, from ﬁfteen to sixty kilometers
wide, where cotton growing was concentrated.148 Although reliance on cotton
does not seem to have been so extreme in Jiaxing as it was slightly further
north, it probably gave rise to a similar dependence on the market network for
the supply of food, and to the reduction in the need to maintain the irrigation
system, since coastal cotton does not need substantial irrigation. When the
late-Qing gazetteer speaks of the constant sound of looms in the prefecture,149
unlike Wang Mian’s poem, it is now largely referring to the weaving of cotton,
and of course silk.
Two statistics bring home the underlying realities of life on the edge. Although
they have to be presented in terms of numbers, their meaning is simple: life in
Jiaxing was short, agriculture extremely productive. An interesting paradox.
The ﬁrst ﬁgure gives the expectation of life at birth of women in Jiaxing. The
expectation of life at birth can be thought of as the age that is the sum of the
person–years lived by a particular group of a particular population (all born at
one time), adjusted by the proportions surviving to each age. In other words,
if we think in discrete and hence approximate terms, each component of this
sum is, for each year of age from 1 up, the proportion still alive at that age.
Graphically, one can represent this more precisely as the area under the curve
of the life table that shows in continuous form the proportions of survivors at
each age (taking the initial number at age 0 as 1). Two slightly different
methods of calculating give slightly different results. The ﬁrst method gives
Jiaxing women 24.5 years, and the second method only 18.3 years.150 The truth
is probably nearer the higher value. But even this is low, and what is clear is
that the women in Jiaxing in late-imperial times had a poor expectation of life

208

Particularities

at birth compared to those in the other two areas that will be studied in the
following two chapters. It may be that we have here a proxy measure of the
high stress under which they lived.
The second ﬁgure concerns the seed-to-yield ratios for rice, in other words
the relationship between how much was sown and how much was harvested.
This is one of several well-known measures of the productivity of agriculture.151 For wheat in early modern Europe, for example, the average rarely
exceeded 1:5.152 In late-imperial Jiaxing, the seed-to-yield ratio for unhusked
rice sown to unhusked rice reaped was, as a measure of volume, between 1:45
and 1:51 in good years for the better farmers.153 For unhusked seeds to husked
rice (the type that was eaten by most people), it was still between approximately 1:31 and 1:36. In other words, the productivity of cereal production per
hectare was of a totally different order from that in Europe at the same time.
This was due to a combination of factors, including the particular characteristics of the food plants concerned (rice rather than wheat and other
dry-land grains), the natural conditions such as the mean annual temperature, the hours of sunshine, the soils and so on, and of course the farming
technology.
Information on seed-to-yield ratios in China is fairly sparse. It is useful to
translate the relevant passage from the Qing gazetteer in full. Note that I have
intentionally mistranscribed gé as he, to avoid it being confused with gè, a
different measure whose only difference is in the tone. The principal
premodern Chinese capacity measures for grain came in multiples of 10:
he, sheng, dou, and shi, in rising orders of magnitude. The exact modern
equivalents are of no relevance in the present context. The mou, the usual
measure of area, was about 0.07 hectare in Ming times, and 0.067 under
the Qing. The sheng, the usual measure of capacity, was slightly more than 1
liter.
[a] In general, for 1 mou one uses 7 or 8 sheng of seeds. [b] 6 ke make 1 le,
and 8 le make 1 ge. [c] From 1 mou one harvests 360 ge of unhusked rice. [d]
The best farmers in a good year can obtain 7 he of husked rice per ge [of
unhusked], and 2 shi 5 dou per mou.154
(1) From [a] and [d] it is clear that 7 (or 8) sheng of unhusked rice seeds give
250 sheng (2.5 shi) of husked rice. The multiplier is 35.71 (or 31.25). (2) Note
next that 250/360 is approximately 0.7 (more precisely, 0.694 . . .). This allows
the conclusion via [d] that the ge was the equivalent for unhusked rice (and
hence also, it would seem, for seeds) of the sheng for husked rice. (3) Hence, in
volumetric terms, the multiplier for seeds (unhusked, needless to say) to
unhusked rice was about 51 (or 45).

209

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

Slight uncertainties arise from the possible variation in the volume of seeds
sown per mou, which can be either 7 or 8 sheng, and from the two possible
ratios for husked to unhusked rice, which can be either 0.694 or 0.7. Table 5
displays the possible outcomes, using [u] for ‘unhusked rice’ and [h] for
‘husked rice’.
Table 5 Seed-to-yield ratios for rice in late-imperial Jiaxing
A.

B.

Seeds in

Grain out

Ratio

Units

Source

7 sheng [u]
7 sheng [u]
8 sheng [u]
8 sheng [u]
4.858 sheng [h]
4.9 sheng [h]
5.552 sheng [h]
5.6 sheng [h]

360 ge [u]
250 sheng [h]
360 ge [u]
250 sheng [h]
250 sheng [b]
250 sheng [h]
250 sheng [h]
250 sheng [h]

1:51.43
1:35.71
1:45.00
1:31.25
1:51.46
1:51.02
1:45.03
1:44.64

[u]/[u]
[u]/[h]
[u]/[u]
[u]/[h]
[h]/[h]
[h]/[h]
[h]/[h]
[h]/[h]

[a]+[c]
[a]+[d]
[a]+[c]
[a]+[d]
250/360
0.7
250/360
0.7

The point of section B is that it shows how much food-grain had to be
foregone in order to sow enough seeds for a crop yielding a given quantity of
food-grain.
The ke was a clump of 5 or 6 rice-plant seedlings,155 in the condition in
which it was ready for transplanting. As one mou was 0.07 hectare, it may be
thought of as a square about 26.5 meters by 26.5 meters. One mou, we are told,
held 6 times 8 times 360 ke, in other words 17,280 (or from 86,400 to 103,680
germinating seeds). The square root of 17,280 is close to 131. If 131 seedlingclumps are transplanted per 26.5 meters, this works out at about 5 per meter,
or 20 centimeters apart. This seems reasonable. If farmers could have sustained
a rate of 5 seedling-clumps a minute, it would have taken 6 people about 10
hours of work to transplant a mou.
These calculations show that, as regards farming, the population of Jiaxing
rested on a productive system that was exceptionally effective even by earlymodern European standards in seed-to-yield terms. There were two concomitants. First, keeping it going at the required level demanded very hard work.
Second, any disruption by drought, ﬂooding, pests, human diseases, or war,
put the lives of an exceptionally large number of people at risk.
Economic pressure led to the partial degendering of farmwork. Hong
Jinghao’s “Peasants’ song,” written in Qing times shows how both men and
women now regularly toiled in the ﬁelds. The ‘well-sweeps’ he refers to were
bailing buckets mounted on one end of a long lever, with a counterbalancing
weight on the other end. They were used for raising water. The ‘lascivious

210

Particularities

worksongs’ were the so-called ‘mountain ditties’,156 and usually as much songs
sung by workers as true chanties, though this is what seems to be referred to
here. The ‘rice-transplanting horses’ were like miniature wooden boats with
saddles on which the person doing the transplanting could sit astride, with his
or her bare feet in the mud on either side. Throughout there is an emphasis on
the economic need to endure discomfort—not only the mud and the insects,
but also work in the hours of darkness—and on the prudence of keeping an
eye on those who might be tempted to slack.157
As the blossoms on plum trees open, the ears of the barley shine golden.
In every village they take out their plows, to furrow the south-facing slopes.
Confused, through the noise of the well-sweeps, drift lascivious worksongs’
notes.
Tomorrow is good, the calendar tells them, for planting out rice-shoots to
grow.
As the women insert them, ﬁelds are ﬂecked green. In, at men’s hands, water
trickles.
The lazy workers are put in front; some way further back, the diligent.
In their blue-green jackets and skirts, black pants, and tunics dyed with
indigo,
They are unabashed, as each day breaks, if they splash themselves with silt.
The moon sinks low, the roosters call, stars are few and far between.
They make use of the cool, in dew-drenched clothes, to fossick out the
weeds.
Trugs in their hands, or shouldering baskets, they straddle their riceplanting ‘steeds’,
And, vexed when their faces are battered at, slap dead the ﬂies and
mosquitoes.
Qian Zai’s “Transplanting Rice Seedlings” touches on the same themes.158 Qian
was a native of Jiaxing, from Xiushui county, and a holder of the highest examination degree. He served in the Board of Ritual during the second half of the
eighteenth century, and was a poet, calligrapher, and painter. His biography
describes him as having “slipped away across the ﬁelds to ﬁnd his own independent style.”159 He wrote under the literary name of ‘Stone Covered With
Fallen Leaves’. His underlying message is the stoical endurance of pain by
farmers.
As she squats, the wife pulls up sprouts, from the bed that has served as
their nursery.
Her husband stands in the ﬁeld, pushing seedlings into the earth,

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

211

Her feet submerged in the water, she is sodden up to her skirts.
Under his rain-cape of straw, his shoulders are soaked as he works.
She has separated a thousand clumps, as neatly as one could wish.
He proﬁts from this efﬁcient help, and grips each between thumb and two
ﬁngers.
His back is stooped in a curve, but the square he has planted grows bigger,
Until, with perfect precision, the whole ﬁeld of seedlings is ﬁlled.
In rectangular intersections — spread out a chessboard of verdure,
Densely textured and seamless, like the robes of the Buddhist clergy,
Multiple needle-like points are emerging, out of the ﬂooded surface,
But the scars of their scratches still endure, upon the hands of the woman.
Mutual encouragement in adversity was also a feature of rural life:160
Before and after the ﬁfth of the ﬁfth moon, when the transplanting of the
rice seedlings is ﬁnished, people contribute money for a feast in honor of
the God of Farmers. There is unstrained wine in earthenware jars, and those
participating shout in drunken fashion and mutually encourage each other to
endure the bitter work. It is called the ‘Green Sprouts Gathering’.
One suspects—there is no proof one way or the other—that this was a festivity
for men only.
Why, then, was farm labor so demanding, both of wary attentiveness and of
hard grind? One reason was that a shortage of suitable land had pushed
premodern technology close to its limits. This made its regular performance at
the desired high level always somewhat problematic. Fine adjustments of
particular activities to time, and of varieties of crop to particular locations,
were critical. An example of the ﬁrst of these is the application of supplementary fertilizer, that is, fertilizer applied to the plant while it is growing, not just
to the soil beforehand: timing and dosage are of the essence. The second was
most commonly relevant to differences in soil composition. Both points are
mentioned in the following description of Pinghu. The three awkward worddoublets at the start reﬂect a real ambiguity in the Chinese terms.161
Heaven–Weather has only one intrinsic energy–substance. Within a
distance of ﬁfty kilometers, the intrinsic energy–substance of the Earth–Soil
will have variations. In our area, the ﬁelds are suitable for yellow rice. Both
early-ripening and late-ripening yellow rice will yield harvests. Of the white
rices, only early glutinous rice will yield a crop. If nonglutinous white rice
meets with a ﬂood, it dies. From north of Blackton and to west of Flowmarket162 the situation is different. Broadly speaking, this is because the soil

212

Particularities

changes. As to techniques of plowing and sowing, a rapid response to
seasonal ﬂuctuations is essential. In addition to this, the work requires
supplementary fertilizing, but even a difference of a few days in timing will
cause immense dissimilarities in harvest yields. This is the difference between
responding correctly and incorrectly to seasonal requirements.
Cautionary tales were told about timing. For example:163
If farmers ever neglect to perform some task, or miss the right seasonal
moment, it often happens that from some such small cause great harm
results. On 1 July 1640, a ﬂood drowned the ﬁelds. Those who had done their
planting on or before 30 June had no disaster when the waters went down.
Those who had planted on or after 1 July had a total write-off.
Sometimes these warnings were in the nature of fables, but the points they
make are still valid. “There once was a man who did not have in readiness a
straw rain-cape and a conical bamboo-leaf hat, so he could not plant his ﬁelds
in the rain, which resulted in his family suffering from a lack of food.” As the
saying had it,
For not spending ten cents,
A family’s wrecked.
More exactly, if more prosaically, “On account of a tenth of an ounce of silver,
hunger can overturn an entire family.”164
A second reason was the time-intensiﬁcation of farmwork in the lateimperial age. Wheat and barley had been grown as winter crops in alternation
with rice since Song times, but this was now done much more extensively, and
they were joined by broad beans, peas, and colza.165 These subsidiary crops, of
which there were in fact far more numerous than the principal ones listed
here,166 were collectively called ‘spring ﬂowers’. There was a popular saying that
if they did well that would provide enough for half a year.167 Jiaxing seems to
have been the focal point of this development, around the beginning of the
seventeenth century, and the practice soon spread up the Yangzi valley.168
The passage on growing wheat and colza in Mr Shen’s Manual for Farmers,
a handbook current in the early seventeenth century, shows how concerned
peasants had become with time as well as correct quantities:169
Opening up the ridges for wheat: It is best for the ﬁelds [where rice has just
been grown] to be dry. If they are soggy, it is necessary to open them up [by
turning over the soil], and to wait until the backs of the ridges have dried
out before putting in the seeds. If the time for doing this has almost passed,
then steep the seeds [in water, and perhaps nutrients] in advance, so they

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

213

produce sprouts, and it is possible to wait until the ridges have dried out. It
is impermissible to stamp down a ﬁrm area that is still surrounded by damp
areas, as the colza and wheat will not be able to grow stalks, and are bound
to wither when spring comes, or, even if they do not die, will not ﬂourish for
long.
When one is planting wheat, the covered reservoir [for liquid manure]
must be full, and the distribution of the seeds must be uniform. This work
must not be skimped; but one tells the women and the young serving-lads to
take life easily. For wheat, one waters it [with liquid manure] once at the
time of planting, and once again in the spring. If one puts on too much
fertilizer, there will, on the contrary, be no harvest. . . . If one sows the wheat
seeds in advance in the ﬁrst ten days of the eighth moon, one waits until
winter to prepare the ﬁelds to which to transplant them. Each transplanting
clump contains ﬁve to six stalks. One applies liquid manure to them twice,
as is the standard practice, and also banks them up with cattle manure,
covering this over [with mud] shoveled out of the [adjacent small] ditch,
after which the stalks are strong and the wheat heavy, yielding a doubled
harvest.
Colza should be given twice as much liquid manure as wheat, and
perhaps also household garbage or cattle manure. One digs mud from the
adjacent ditch and once again applies liquid manure to force the blossoms.
The injunction that “one tells the women and the young serving-lads to take
life easily,”170 is in some ways more expressive of the pressure that everyone was
under than the direct descriptions of unremitting toil.
The time-intensity of rearing silkworms is also often mentioned. As noted
earlier, during the month or so, starting around the time of the spring festival,
when the worms were feeding, both men and women neglected their toilette,
and if the worms did not mount their trestles to turn into moths, “whole families would cry.” If the silk harvest failed, the parents might have to sell their
children.171 Men would come home, even from far away, to assist with the
collection of the essential mulberry leaves. Women would return, even if they
had been visiting their parents, and “day and night they would be nervously
preoccupied with the business of their cocoons.”172
Sources both of fertilizers and of pasturage were also under pressure. It is
not possible to date the following exactly, but it is probably from the Qing:173
Whether one is planting wet-land ﬁelds or dry-land ﬁelds, supplementary
fertilizer is important. Human manure has a beneﬁcial power, and cattle
manure has a long-lasting effect. One should not use one and neglect to use
the other. Making a contract with city residents to purchase their excrement

214

Particularities

is of fundamental importance.174 Recently, however, the price of excrement
has become dear. The cost of human labor is high, and fetching it from the
city oneself wastes energy. Thieving is widespread. If it is not possible to rely
entirely on such a contract for excrement, then rearing sheep or pigs is a
convenient supplement. . . . For the food that a sheep eats in a year one
obtains a sufﬁciency of wool and lambs, while the expenditure is merely the
provision of grass [as fodder]. Without any effort one obtains a large quantity of supplementary fertilizer . . . . For sheep though, if one has to hire
someone to chop the hay, then this can really waste one’s reserves to provide
this person’s rations during the slack season in winter and spring. . . . These
days sheep can eat nothing but withered leaves and dry grass. . . . Cattle
manure is best applied to dry-land ﬁelds, and pig’s manure to wet-land
ﬁelds. . . . To purchase human excrement one has to go to Hangzhou. It is
not possible to buy full loads [from the privies] along the levees.
The combination of arable farming and stock rearing in Jiaxing thus developed in part as a response to a shortage of fertilizers. In some areas of the
prefecture at least, oxen were already present because they were used for
plowing.175 Pigs were of course scavengers and lived mostly off scraps. The
sheep, though, were probably reared in a restricted area as they had to be
hand-fed, since there was often no longer the space for them to graze.
Cotton had both positive and negative features from the point of view of the
cultivator. Produced continuously in the same place, it drained the fertility
away from the soil, so rotations were desirable. Cotton harvests were also apt
to be highly variable. Against this, it required less water than did rice, and so
reduced the labor needed for irrigation and for maintaining water-control
systems. Jiaxing, as we have noted, was in fact less a producer of the raw material than a processor, developing a preindustrial industrialism of a kind found
in Western Europe at much the same period, notably in parts of the Netherlands. This was emphasized by the late-Qing prefectural gazetteer in the case
of Haiyan county:176
The land here produces very little raw cotton. Spinning it into yarn,
however, and weaving it into cloth, are regular businesses to which families
and households are accustomed. This is so not only in the rural villages but
also in the county capital. Traveling merchants constantly come from the
next-door prefectures to sell raw cotton, and set up their shops in lines on
our land. The poor folk go to the market at the break of day with what they
have spun or woven, exchange it for raw cotton, and return home. . . . They
burn oil lamps to work in the hours of darkness. Men and women sometimes
do not sleep the whole night through. When farming families have a harvest,

Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing

215

once they have used it to pay off their obligations to the state, their dwellings
are bare at the end of the year, so they rely entirely on this industry for their
clothing and food.
There is no rule that determines that a preindustrial industrialism like this will
necessarily turn into the real thing one day, even with a market system ﬁnely
enough meshed, as this one was, to bypass any need for a system of puttingout. What we are seeing, though, is the beginning of something with which
full-scale industrialization has made us more familiar: Haiyan was living in
what was partly, so to speak, an ‘invisible environment’, that is, one many of
whose determining conditions were no longer part of daily experience, or
subject to direct observation, but mostly far away and linked to it only through
a market mechanism and second-hand information.
The prefecture’s population crashed to less than half its mid-nineteenthcentury total as the result of the Taiping rebellion just after the midpoint of the
nineteenth century.177 A vivid reminder of the fragility of growth curves to
more or less aleatoric ﬂuctuations in political conditions. Nonetheless the
people of Jiaxing had come a long way since wild rice once grew in the undiked
wetlands of the delta. They had shown extraordinary ingenuity, and extraordinary powers of resilience and survival. But the ﬁnal, sober, verdict on the
value of this multimillennial journey remains ambiguous.

8
Chinese Colonialism:
Guizhou and the Miao
Guizhou province was another world. Guiyang, the capital prefecture, perched
at 1250 meters atop the headwaters of four river basins.1 Its peach trees and
plum trees were famous for a “beauty and fragrance that dazzled the eyes”
when in blossom, and its climate was without extremes of hot or cold.2
Around it spread a subtropical labyrinth of mountains and plunging river
valleys. Snakes, monkeys, tigers, deer, and many other animals and birds
ﬂourished in its forests. Malaria lay in wait in some places, though not in
others. Metallic ores like cinnabar, from which quicksilver is extracted, lured
in Chinese merchants and entrepreneurs, as did its timber, which was ﬂoated
out down its rivers.
Here was the ancient home of the Miao people, though not their original
home. Miao songs, orally transmitted, suggest that they once lived along the
eastern seaboard, but at some point made a long and difﬁcult trek westward,3
probably gradually driving back other tribes such as the Lolo as they moved.
The songs refer to excessive population density as the problem that made them
leave, but it is more likely to have been Chinese pressure. In the course of this
journey they seem to have mastered the art of making axes to cut down trees,
as well as other tools, all of this technical progress, including constructing
boats and wooden houses, being remembered with delight in the chanted
question-and-answer verses.4
In Guizhou, some of the Miao allied themselves with the incoming Chinese
and became partially culturally assimilated; some of them were even led by the
descendants of Chinese, often imperial appointees to local chieftaincies, who
had ‘gone native’. Others fought over many centuries for their liberty. Resistance seems to have started in Ming times, when a measure of direct Chinese

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

217

government control was established and Han in-migration increased.5 Their
struggle for liberty was ﬁnally defeated only in the early 1870s.6
Although the Miao had both cannons and muskets by Qing times, possibly
ﬁrst acquired from the defeated remnants of Wu Sangui’s anti-Manchu forces in
the 1680s, imperial superiority in ﬁrearms probably played a part in keeping
them in check.7 Since the Miao “swarmed everywhere in the mountain valleys,
skulking off in all directions into the jungle whenever they were attacked, only
to regroup again a moment later,”8 the government armies sought to destroy
them by stripping them of their cover. They burned the Miao settlements,
sometimes by shooting ‘ﬁre-arrows’ at them,9 and “cut down the mountain trees
to open roads to put direct pressure on their forts.”10 To speed military transport
along the rivers they “dredged the shallows and shoals, cleared away underwater
rocks, cut down the great forests, and bored through the uncanny rocks.”11 The
Miao protected themselves by felling huge trees to block the mountain roads,
and building palisades with gaps to ﬁre through.12 Environmental conditions
shaped the nature of warfare, and warfare reshaped the environment.
The social tensions caused by the Chinese conquest and occupation, which
was always to some degree under threat, fostered the conditions for criminal
activities. Thus in the early eighteenth century one group of Miao “from time
to time would emerge to seize both Chinese and non-Chinese boys and girls,
and sell them to Chinese renegades for resale in other provinces, which earned
them huge proﬁts.”13 The semi-assimilated Miao may have suffered the most,
being caught between the two main warring forces:14
When there is no military business, they are conscripted for transport
haulage. When there are military activities, they are driven in advance as
guides. The soldiers and the commoner–civilians15 treat them like slaves.
The unassimilated Miao hate them like cruel foes. When the ofﬁcial forces
triumph, the unassimilated Miao ﬁnd an opening to slaughter the semiassimilated Miao in order to give vent to their fury. When the unassimilated
Miao triumph, the ofﬁcial troops move around at random butchering the
semi-assimilated, so as to be able to make unjustiﬁed claims for military
achievements.
On one occasion, when semi-assimilated Miao responded to attempts to
conciliate them, the ofﬁcial troops killed the men and seized and sold their
wives and daughters for proﬁt. When news of this atrocity reached other Miao
men, they “felt in their hearts that they were certain to die, and many of them
killed their wives and daughters with their own hands” so as to steel themselves
to resist to the end.16 Whether at war or at peace, or in a state somewhere in
between, it was a colonial territory where, as the late-nineteenth-century

218

Particularities

gazetteer noted, “since half the Miao do not understand our language or script,
it is hard to unify attitudes and customs.”17 Besides the endemic warfare,
there was continual danger from ordinary criminals and socially marginal
groups of in-migrants, as well as the greedy and ill-disciplined troops of the
government armies.
The region was beautiful, but in its own strange and frightening way. It was
a place of economic proﬁt for well-organized and wealthy outsiders, but one
where the locals were dispossessed of their geographical inheritance. It was a
refuge for Chinese adventurers, refugees, and malcontents from other
provinces, but at times could terrify even them—climatically, medically, and
militarily. For the Han people—ofﬁcials, soldiers, merchants, and settlers—
conquering it, and then bringing it under conceptual, environmental,
economic, and administrative control was a difﬁcult enterprise that was far
from complete by the beginning of modern times.
Guizhou was Chinese colonialism in action. It may provide an approximate
pattern for what happened in earlier ages in other regions when Han Chinese
expansion was just beginning. The ideological justiﬁcation was a civilizing
mission, but administrators could be frank about the realities. Here is part of
the prefect’s preface to the 1850 Guiyang gazetteer.18 It should be noted that he
passes over in silence the long centuries in the ﬁrst and early second millennia
ce during which the region was ruled by independent, or semi-independent,
states like Nanzhao and its successor Dali.
At the time of the transition from the Qin to the Han dynasty, the commandery19 of Zangge had already been established in what is today Guizhou. The
frontier was opened by Zhuang Qiao [a general from the state of Chu (in
the Center), who set himself up as an independent ruler when faced with
the appearance of the Qin empire late in the third century bce]. When Tang
Meng was sent [in the second century bce] on his mission [to Nanyue in
the Far South], the area forthwith fell under imperial jurisdiction, but it was
only controlled on a light rein.
Coming down to the Mongol-Yuan and the Ming dynasties [from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries], there were innumerable battles before it
was eventually subdued. Renewed revolts followed, and it came close to
being abandoned. Such is the difﬁculty of controlling the imperial stronghold! In general it is only necessary to have feelings of scorn and indifference
and these people will in their turn fearlessly and recklessly resist us.
At the present day registered households have been established everywhere in the poisonous gorges and the malaria-ridden mountain ranges.
The natives, who clothe themselves with grasses, and talk with what sounds

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

219

to us like the speech of birds, have all been enrolled in the ofﬁcial population registers. We have driven away the wolves and foxes, and opened up the
rocky mountains and the weedy wastes for farming. Every year a harvest of
grain is sickled and reaped, and no one dares to be a laggard in performing
labor-services for the state.
The general explanation for this is the far-reaching range of the civilizing
inﬂuence that treats strangers kindly. Men of talent have tacitly internalized
the Court’s intention of arousing people to exert themselves. Not wishing to
be excluded, they collaborate with each other in making clear by explanation both moral principles and practical skills, and they hasten to pursue the
‘carpenter’s set-square and the plumb-line’ of rectitude in conduct.
In 1854, not long after these complacent words were written, the last great
uprising of the Miao broke out and was not put down for almost twenty years.
Two preliminary comments on this preface may be useful:
First, population. The earliest date for which approximately credible ﬁgures
for Guiyang prefecture are available is “at the transition from the Qianlong to
the Jiaqing reign,” that is around 1800. At this time there were on the order of
152,000 households. The draft gazetteer prepared some time later but before
1850, recorded 173,000 households and about 904,000 individuals, a ratio of
about 5.2 persons per household.20 The prefect’s comment about increased
enrolment in the registers over time indicates that the difﬁculty in distinguishing between actual growth and statistical growth would make any estimate of population increase in the centuries or decades prior to this last date
unreliable.
Second, the perpetual unrest. The crucial administrative crisis in this
respect was the effort started by the Yongzheng Emperor in the 1720s and early
1730s to abolish or reduce the powers of the internally autonomous local chieftaincies through which most of the non-Chinese population had hitherto been
governed by a system of indirect rule.21 He expressed his view of the general
situation in a decree issued in 1724 to the governors-general and governors of
eight provinces:22
We have heard that few of the local chieftaincies in various places acknowledge the discipline of law. The annual levies on the local people under their
jurisdiction are not merely twice to ﬁve times as much as the burden of the
regular taxes, but may even go as far as the seizure of people’s cattle and
horses, the kidnapping of people’s sons and daughters, and the butchering
of people as they feel inclined. . . . The cause of the local chieftaincies daring
to act in this depraved manner is, however, always Chinese renegades, who
have either taken refuge with them to escape punishment on account of

220

Particularities

some affair or breach of the law, or who have piled one evil deed on top of
another, relying on the power of the local chieftaincies to act outrageously.
In a decree the following year to senior ofﬁcials engaged in suppressing unrest,
the emperor described some of the ugly events reported to have been going on:23
We have heard that the Miao people in Guizhou province are the most
lawless. In the third and fourth lunar months last year, they dared to
assemble like ants and loot the market towns. By the eighth lunar month,
the provincial governor and commander-in-chief had mobilized two thousand soldiers who were given the task of advancing to exterminate the
miscreants. In the ninth lunar month their travels brought them to the
department of Dingfan in Guiyang prefecture. Here the soldiers forcibly
purchased the goods of the commoner–civilians and created such an uproar
that the market went on strike. That evening they reached Gulan, where ﬁres
did not stop all night. They further burnt ﬁve encampments of assimilated
Miao tribespeople, so causing the Chinese commoner–civilians to join with
the Miao in a joint defense during which they shot at and wounded the
government soldiers.
Intermittent local warfare with multiple causes smoldered constantly, ﬂaring
up from time to time into major uprisings. During the Qing, the four main
conﬂagrations occurred during the 1690s, 1730s (prompted by resistance to
Yongzheng’s reforms), 1790s, and 1854–73.24
Every document about Guiyang has to be understood against this background, no matter whether it is a decree, a preface, or a poem.

The Miao
What did this world look like from the non-Chinese side? There are only a
handful of sources accessible at present that shed light on this, but an anthology
of antiphonal wedding songs in the Miao language from the southeast of
Guizhou gives us some vivid if unsystematic insights into their view of the environment in which they lived. These songs were collected in the last twenty or
thirty years, in part because they were dying out. It is hard to know how far they
have changed since late-imperial times, and to what extent they have been edited
and possibly expurgated. The selection of translations that follow are based on
the Chinese-language word-for-word versions of the Miao transcriptions.25
Here, to begin with, is a familiar storm:26
Lightning ﬂickering in the heavens
Rumbles with the voice of thunder,

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

221

Waters in the rivers swelling,
Rills running off the hills and summits.
But in the hot summer weather “one takes off one’s clothes as a snake sheds its
skin, or the water scorpion its shell.”27 One is, though self-consciously, an
animal too. Not a civilized Han sentiment.
Everything has a cause:28
If there is a child, then there must have been a mother.
If a river, then a trickling — from a cliff top above.
But, both to us and the Chinese, these causes could be strange. For the Miao,
all living creatures, including deities and animals, were the outcome of mixed
marriages made in mythical antiquity, and hence kin. That is why marriages
were so important. Even rocks sought matrimony:29
If these rocks do not get married,
Then these rocks will all get angry!
Necks swelling in rage to monstrous size,
These rocks will swallow up our wives,
Swallow each one of our afﬁnes!
Ordinary wildlife could be observed in straightforward fashion:30
Yellow and gray, the sleeping locusts
Upon the hillside’s grassy slopes.
Or imagined in terms of marriage mythology:31
The monkey family’s seeing off the new bride’s relatives
To where the mountain’s forest trees provide them all with shelter.
Ah, how verdant are that mountain forest’s depths!
Such woods are, more often than not, present in the actual or mental background, though at times only for rhetorical purposes, as in the following:32
Thrusting their way through the villages, they go hunting for worthy
persons,
Entering into the forest, it’s dry ﬁrewood they are in search of.
But even if they get their hands on a single half-dried stick,
There’s nowhere they encounter human beings of moral worth,
For all that they meet up with a couple who are quick-witted.
Dry wood burns better than wet, but Guizhou is a rainy area. ‘Looking for dry
wood’ was a common Miao way of symbolizing something difﬁcult.

222

Particularities

An agricultural landscape is, however, the one in which most people live, at
least by this late period:33
Having passed the sinuous ditches that bring water to the paddies,
Channels for irrigation which wind this way, then wind that,
At last they make it to the place where the mighty bridge is standing.
Almost certainly, one suspects, not a bridge built by the Miao themselves. The
folk songs have already incorporated the strange presence and constructions
of the outsiders.
Further on, we are given some standard popular wisdom:34
A village’s watercourse fully ﬂowing
Means its harvests will be golden.
But, but little current in its river
Betokens harvests without fruition.
Stray phrases suggest that ﬁshing and trapping could put pressure on
resources as population swelled:35
Eight hundred homesteads in one hamlet:
Along one stream, eight hundred crab traps.
The traps were woven of bamboo and could also be made for catching ﬁsh.
But the song may just be exulting in the richness of numbers: human and
crustacean. And the fascination of one-to-one correspondences.
Nature was both metaphor and reality. In one song a father-in-law and
mother-in-law, seeing silver piling up in the pan of the steelyard used to weigh
it, are described as struggling over the money, tugging each other’s hair, and their
Foreheads colliding, face to face,
Like sparrows stuck in sticky paste. 36
In another, certain individuals are said to
Scoop up the tube-like webs of spiders,
As bait on hooks for ﬁsh on lines.37
A number of ground spiders do have sleeve-like webs of this sort.
Wild plants were gathered. Like the dry ﬁrewood mentioned above, they
also served as parallels evoking aspects of human life. So one song poses the
question: will the go-between
Discover an elder brother who can act as his sister’s companion,
Or ﬁnd wild, pungent, pepper as a side-dish for the garlic?38

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

223

Tasty spice, if you can get it.
The wild animals most commonly mentioned are small: wildcats, monkeys
(eating the wild fruit), rats, water rats, and otters. Frogs are alluded to—as
food. The references to tigers are all to antiquity, though they existed here in
late-imperial times. There is also a poem about the search for marriage partners by the rhinoceroses, but this is wholly in mythical mode.
The dominant impression is of a society engaged in farming, both in ﬁelds
and in hedged vegetable gardens, and in rearing stock—cattle, horses, mules,
pigs, chickens, ducks, and geese—as well as domestic cats and dogs. But with
a sense still alive of living closer to a wilder nature than the Chinese did.
The songs open with a ritual question. In the distant past, when this farming
society was being created,
Who was it sowed the cereal crops after opening up the land,
And killed the ox to seal the bonds that constitute a marriage?39
The answer is two fabled ancestors of the Miao. Farming is linked to the emergence of a human society:40
Deep lay the darkness on the sky
And darkness on the earth below.
There was thunder, there was lightning.
Water from the ﬂoods rose high.
Transforming it by weeding, hoeing,
They cut the channels broad and wide,
Built there a village, good and ﬁne,
Sending the waters downward ﬂowing,
A place where kinsmen could reside
And afﬁnes too be domiciled.
Stubble was burnt to enrich the soil:41
Land gains its fertility by feeding on the ﬁres.
As ducks grow plump by devouring husks of rice.
Acreage was a measure of wealth. Rainbow, acting as matchmaker for Dragon,
tells the father of the prospective bride that the groom is exceedingly wellto-do:42
A hundred thousand poles’ extent is his family’s property,
And nine thousand hamlets in one single spot.
Simple hydraulic installations are constantly mentioned:43

224

Particularities

In the deep, dammed-up, pool are thousand-year-old ﬁsh.
Water buffalo and ordinary cattle furnish the labor-power:44
Off to harrowing the ﬁelds goes the gray water buffalo.
It’s by plowing up these clods that our senior folk are nourished.
And later:
In the seventh lunar month, when the season’s getting hot,
The buffaloes will slosh about, deep in mud-ﬁlled wallows.45
Finally, the songs speak of a commercialized society, with markets in its
settlements.46 The Miao cast their own iron farm tools,47 made boats,48 and
wove cloth.49 The ridgebeams of their houses “curled up like a horse’s saddle.”50
They had temples to local divinities,51 and were familiar with law courts that
used written plaints, one would guess in Chinese.52 They also had their own
system of symbolic recording, at least for marriage contracts, which were
incised on wood. The description of one such contract praises its graphic
precision, and speaking of what may be some sort of indigenous written characters says they were
Either splayed apart, like a puppy’s paws,
Or curling, like a wether’s horns.53
Some of these features of society, especially the familiarity with law courts,
must have been due to Chinese rule and inﬂuence over the centuries, though
it is unclear for each particular aspect how much. The core matter of the songs
is likely to be very old, but more recent developments were easily embedded
in them.
Miao sensory responses to nature were unusually empathetic. Lines such as
“The soft murmuring of the countless leaves”54 are evidence of this, but more
distinctive are moments of wry empathy with other creatures. In the lines that
follow, Xang is the person who is the main subject of the song. Looking for a
wife, he is carrying a present:55
Here is a ﬂock of gray-hued drakes
Standing along the paddy-ﬁeld’s bank.
They watch Xang come to discuss engagement,
With another drake dangling down from his back.
The comfortable living observing the uncomfortable and doomed.
It must be admitted that in many of these songs the sense is obscure. The
quotations given above have not adequately conveyed the strangeness, from
our perspective, of the Miao’s conceptual world. But it should be clear that to

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

225

think of them simply as ‘barbarians’ because they were not fully assimilated
into the Chinese way of life is a misunderstanding based on the often less than
generous Han perceptions. Equally it is evident that their simpler worldview
could not forever resist the complex power of Chinese culture.

Warfare and development
Warfare was the driving force of the development of the southwestern frontier,
and military success the prerequisite for full-scale economic and of course
administrative penetration. There was no way in the Southwest of moving
from conﬂict to a more or less stable peace based on the agreed ﬁctions of
‘tributary status’ such as eventually proved possible with well-organized
governments in Korea and Vietnam, which were also of course capable of
mounting effective military resistance. Although the Song had had good relations with the highly sinized Nanzhao in Yunnan, there was no stable political
structure here in late-imperial times with which the Chinese empire could
establish an enduring and dependable understanding.
Nor could the area just be left in a condition of benign neglect. Frontier
ﬁghting between the Chinese and the Miao, Yao, Zhuang, and other tribesmen
created what was, from the Chinese point of view, a perpetual problem of
security. The main approach adopted under the middle empire was to offer
imperial recognition to hereditary local chieftains, thus strengthening their
positions against local rivals, in return for the acknowledgment by these chieftains of Chinese sovereignty and, often, the provision of tribute. This mostly
continued on into the later empire, but with the introduction of a varying
number of regular bureaucrats. Some of the old local families had however
held positions of dominance in their own bailiwicks under varying titles for
many centuries. Thus the forebears of Yang Yinglong, the paciﬁcation ofﬁcer
in charge of Bozhou on the border of Sichuan province with Guizhou, who
rose in revolt in 1589, had held ofﬁcial positions here during the late Tang, the
Song, and the Mongol dynasties, as well as under the Ming.
One of the best examples of the interaction between warfare and the environment is provided by the crushing of the rising of the Yao tribesmen of Great
Vine Gorge in the later ﬁfteenth century. This area is immediately south of
Guizhou province, some thirty kilometers north of Guiping in Guangxi
province. Though not identical in environment with southern Guizhou,
having, for example, more persistent malaria, it is close enough to be a useful
guide. The story below is taken from the unofﬁcial compilation made by the
Qing ofﬁcial Gu Yingtai in 1658, The Main Themes and Details of Ming History

226

Particularities

Recounted. The perspective and the implicit evaluations are those of early
Manchu times.56
Countless mountains rise up in the region of Xunzhou57 in Guangxi,
winding this way and that. The Xun River runs through the middle. . . . The
most evilly perilous place in the mountains ﬂanking this river, and forming
a lofty canyon, is the Great Vine Gorge. The reason for this name is that a
single vine once grew across the gorge like a footbridge [and was used by the
Yao for this purpose].
Great Vine Gorge is the highest point in the region. If one climbs the
mountains above it, every detail for more than a hundred kilometers round
about lies spread before one’s eyes. The gathering and dispersal of armies,
and their movements, can all be observed. The tribesmen used it as their
secret command post. . . .
The Li mountains58 lie within the Fu River of the Vine Gorge. These are
twice as dangerous as the Vine Gorge. . . . Within the bend of the river are
gloomy peaks, secluded valleys, multistepped cliffs, and walls of sheer rock.
Those who venture in have to hold on and pull with their hands as they shift
their foothold, changing direction with almost every step. If they lose their
footing, their bodies plunge several hundreds of fathoms down. This is where
the Yao people live . . . and also the Zhuang, skilled at applying poison to the
arrows of their crossbows. Anyone struck by one of these dies there and then.
Gu goes on to describe the rising in 1450–6 of the Yao chieftain Big Dog Hou,
whose forces “attacked and ruined prefectures and counties, appearing and
then disappearing again among the mountains and valleys.” By 1457–64,
offering rewards for his capture had proved useless, and the president of the
Ministry of War, Wang Hong, observed that dealing with Big Dog could be
“compared to dealing with a spoiled child: the more indulgence was shown to
him, the more he would howl. If he were not ﬂogged until the blood ﬂowed,
he would not stop howling.” In 1465 Han Yong led a suppression campaign
aiming directly at the rebels’ headquarters above Great Vine Gorge. After
defeating some Miao ‘bandits’, and instilling fear into his own forces by
ordering the beheading of four ofﬁcers who had failed to observe discipline,
he then used 160,000 soldiers drawn from local sources to destroy the outlying
defenses. They took 1,200 prisoners alive and cut off more than 7,300 heads.
When he conferred with the local elders about how to proceed next they are
said to have offered this advice:
Great Vine Gorge is a natural fortress, with multiple peaks and dense
thickets of bamboo. It is afﬂicted by malaria in spring, summer, and fall. We
have grown up in this land, but even we have not been able to grasp its

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

227

essential features fully. What is more, the bandits have heard of the arrival
of your great army, and have strengthened their preparations. The best plan
for you would be to surround them by installing military colonists, who can
both ﬁght and mount guard over them. Thus the bandits will automatically
perish without your meeting them in battle.
The elders were understandably anxious to avoid the carnage and destruction
of all-out war in their homeland.
Han Yong disagreed. The terrain was too confused, and its area too extensive, for an effective blockade. He also had a poor opinion of the motivation of
military colonists. He therefore ordered the passes out of the mountains to be
blocked and launched an attack from all sides:
Having learned that the troops were coming, the ‘bandits’ put their womenfolk into encampments on the cliffs, . . . and set up palisades in the southern
part of the Gorge area, sturdy and compactly built. They rolled tree trunks
and boulders downhill, and their spears and poisoned arrows fell like drops of
water. The government forces climbed the mountain, attacking uphill. . . . The
commanders and subordinate ofﬁcers advanced in ﬁle, using such devices as
circular shields, climbing irons,59 and alpenstocks,60 all of them ﬁghting to the
death. . . . Han Yong ordered that the vegetation be set on ﬁre. The smoke and
ﬂames from the ﬁerce conﬂagration blotted out the light of the sun. Darkness
came in the daytime, and the ‘bandits’ were scattered far and wide.
Numerous Yao were captured and the “goods accumulated in their houses
were stained red with blood.” Han had his forces pursue those who had gone
to protect their women. To do this his men “cut down the trees on the mountains and drove roads through them.” This destruction of the habitat was ecowar. Gu describes the woods and bamboo thickets on this second mountain as
“hatefully dense, leaving no place for a human being.” Han Yong enticed the
Yao into making a sortie, and then mowed them down with cannon, which
must have taken an immense effort to bring up the slopes. After “scaling trees
and clambering up vines, . . . like gibbons chinning themselves or ants sticking
to a surface,” the imperial troops “burnt the palisades by shooting ﬁre-arrows
at them.” This last term can also refer to small rockets. More than three thousand Yao heads were chopped off, after which Han had a patch of rock rubbed
smooth and the year and the month of his victory inscribed on it. Last of all
he had severed the huge vine that spanned the gorge, serving the Yao as a
bridge on which they were said to have crossed “like ants,” and renamed the
place ‘Cut Vine Gorge’.
The effects of this barbaric civilizing mission lasted somewhat more than
twenty years. The reason for this was that Han Yong could suggest no plan for

228

Particularities

stabilizing the region other than a rejigging of the familiar quasi-feudalism. In
practice, allocating ﬁefs to his subordinate ofﬁcers. They were soon taking
bribes from the ‘bandits’. More generally,
The ‘bandits’ . . . blocked the river, and waylaid and robbed travelers.
Censor-in-Chief Chen Jin declared that the tribesmen were only proﬁting
from local trade, and made a pact with them: when merchant vessels
entered the Gorge, they would give the bandits ‘ﬁsh and salt’ in an amount
calculated according to the size of the boat. The bandits would go to the
bank of the river to receive this protection money as if it were a customs levy
on commerce. They would not, however, obstruct passage.
At ﬁrst the tribesmen took their proﬁt and respected the terms of this
agreement. The route became by and large passable. Censor-in-Chief Chen
Jin further expressed the view that this system could prove an enduring one,
and changed the name of the place to ‘Gorge of Perpetual Thoroughfare’.
Before long, however, the bandits had become increasingly shameless on
this account, and robbed on a huge scale. If anyone was not happy with this,
they would kill him forthwith.
In 1512, the philosopher–bureaucrat Wang Yangming took charge of the
campaign to suppress the bandits, but the need to keep up the pressure
continued long after his death in 1520. Gu Yingtai’s comments show his sense
of frustration at the difﬁculties of framing an effective policy. Mixing ‘local’
and ‘circulating’ ofﬁcials did not lead to effective administration. Confucian
education made a minimal impact on the ferocious Yao nature. Trade caused
them to “snarl like dogs at the sight of proﬁt.” Pinning them down with strongpoints gave rise to “a disruption that makes them panic like wild animals.”
They were useless as human material, but could not be “excluded from civilization.” It was too costly to station a large number of troops permanently in
the area, but a small number would not be able to do the job required. Military colonies did not stop pillaging.
A strategy for solving such problems by the transformation of the Guizhou
environment through agricultural development eventually emerged in northwestern Guizhou from the program formulated by Zhu Xieyuan in 1629. Zhu
had been put in charge with suppressing the linked uprisings of the Lolo
leader She Chongming and of An Bangyan, a hereditary local ofﬁcial over the
Miao in Shuixi, whose ancestors had sided with successive Chinese governments since the third century bce.61
Zhu convened a large meeting with his generals at which he said: “Shuixi
has numerous dangerous places in its mountains, and dense thickets of
bamboos. The smoke from the cooking ﬁres of the tribesmen and the
stinging rain together make it impossible to tell night from day. If one

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

229

goes in to any distance, it is hard to get out again. For this reason one can
often be defeated. You and I must keep a ﬁrm grasp on the key positions,
attack them repeatedly, and gradually cleanse the area of ‘bandits’. If we
cause the ‘bandits’ to run short of food, this will in itself bring about that
they perish.”
They thereupon burnt the places that shielded Shuixi. They hacked open
the caves that might have offered shelter. They diverted the ﬂow of the
streams. They sent out strong soldiers to move rapidly around over a range
of more than ﬁfty kilometers a day, either beheading woodcutters and
herdsmen, or setting ﬁre to their accumulated stocks of grain, returning
each evening to their camps. The ‘bandits’ found it harder and harder to
anticipate what was going to happen. In somewhat more than a hundred
days the government troops had obtained over ten thousand decapitated
heads, and several tens of thousands of live captives. Whenever they were
guided by a local they would open up underground stores of grain and
consume them, while the ‘bandits’ suffered severely from hunger.
When An surrendered, Zhu proposed to the emperor nine principles that he
thought appropriate for maintaining peace:
(1) Normal bureaucratic prefectures and counties will not be established,
but rather military Guard Areas. No change will be imposed on customs, so
locals and Chinese will be at peace with each other.
(2) More land will be opened up for farming. Day by day the settlements will
become more densely populated. Once the division of the land into ﬁelds has
been correctly carried out, the local chieftains will not be able to make
encroachments onto land not currently farmed by the commoner–civilians.
(3) Guizhou’s soils are of poor quality, and the province depends for its
supplies on the provinces outside. If it can now live off its own land, this will
spare it the toil of transportation.
(4) Since the state’s resources are close to the point of being exhausted, there
is not enough money in the Treasury to reward the generals. If titles are used
for rewards, they are of little substance, and it would be preferable to give
them land, which does no damage to the state.
(5) Once they have been permitted to hold land on a hereditary basis, they
can establish their families, and will constitute an enduring bulwark against
enemies.
(6) Greater and lesser will be linked together, the weighty and the less
weighty controlling each other. . . .
(7) Training will be given to farmers, and the soldiers kept in good order. . . .
(8) Soldiers and commoner–civilians shall be permitted to farm if they ﬁnd
it appropriate. By both farming and acting as frontier garrisons, the Guard

230

Particularities

Areas and their constituent Company Areas will be self-sufﬁcient, and there
will be no difﬁculty in assembling an armed force.
(9) Farming by the soldiers will replace the provision of their rations.
Farming by the commoner–civilians will make possible the payment of
taxes. The military colony system will be used for taxing farming. They will
not be obliged to be in the registers of population. Thus farming will be the
means by which the settled population will grow. They will not be assigned to
hereditary service [as in the early Ming], so that everyone may be contented
with his occupation.
Bearing in mind that the Miao also practised farming, this may be seen as a
program for the siniﬁcation of society by easy stages. A quasi-feudal military
administrative structure would provide a framework for development, and
cultural differences would be respected. He was soon able to report to the
emperor that, “I have now divided up the territory of Shuixi and bestowed it
on various tribal chieftains and on meritorious Chinese, so that all of them may
maintain it through succeeding generations.” He was homogenizing cultures.
Although it is not stated, the implication seems to be that at some point well
in the future, the transition to regular bureaucratic government could come
about when there were the resources to support it, and enough social cohesion
to avoid splits in society. It is also clear, both from the general tenor of the
sources quoted in the preceding pages and some of the policies proposed, that
there was plenty of cultivable land available here in the seventeenth century,
even if not of a particularly good quality. There was a contrast here with lateimperial Jiaxing.
Thus the nature of the terrain in Guizhou and nearby areas had a decisive
effect on the nature of warfare. It made prolonged guerrilla resistance to
central authority possible, but it also made locally based success of a sustained,
as opposed to a sporadic, kind almost impossible over the longer term. The
province did not provide enough manpower or resources to match what the
central government could put in the ﬁeld. On the other hand, the cost of
projecting power more than intermittently into such an environment was
unacceptably heavy for the Chinese state. In the long run, as Zhu Xieyuan and
a number of other Chinese leaders came to realize, the only solution was to
change the environment.
Peng Ermi was the governor of Guizhou under the Manchus in the middle
of the seventeenth century, a gung-ho conquistador who celebrated military
subjugation, settlement, development, and the enslavement of the native
population with enthusiastic relish. Here is his “Ballad of Shuixi,” written just
after the crushing of the An clan’s rising in the region west of Guiyang.62 The
phrase ‘plume-topped heavenly generals’ is a rendering of a term with a double

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

231

meaning: a group of stars in the constellation Aquarius, and the emperor’s
personal bodyguard. Wumeng and Dongchuan were just across Guizhou’s
western border in Yunnan.
Our Sage Ruler’s sacred battalions — have engaged in long-lasting
suppression
And holy strategic wars been waged by plume-topped heavenly generals,
Commanders especially despatched to transmit the Imperial Plans,
And ten myriad ironclad cavalry to be Shuixi city’s garrison.
With leadership all that could be wished — beyond compare, in truth,
Amidst the tumult of angry menace, a tempestuous storm was brewing,
Their carven bows in carrying-cases, arrows tucked in at their waists,
Laughing,“Such rats don’t make the grade, e’en for extermination!
“Miao forts are not ﬁt battleﬁelds for real military engagements,
And the underground boltholes of those hardly human don’t merit
consideration.
Not since the world emerged from chaos has one ever set eyes on the like
Of these forests, and thickets of bamboo, that extend beyond the
horizon.”
We have chiseled through hills, and ﬂattened highways, drums rumbling to
trumpets’ music.
Helmeted on our chargers’ backs, parched grain wrapped for travel food,
Ox carts carrying those of importance, while the lesser bear loads on their
backs,
Every day, for our Imperial Court, we’ve developed new arable lands.
Across four prefectures, north and south, spread the fertile acres in plenty.
Wumeng, and Dongchuan, compete with us as to which shall enjoy
supremacy.
Once the present generation has wed, we’ll control what’s before and what’s
after.
Farm settlements in the past southwest were once but no longer are
marginal.
Our victory, yesterday proclaimed, has three outstanding triumphs:
We have lashed their hands behind their backs, or swallowed their lands like
Leviathan,
And, with no more than a single blow, quelled or doomed to extermination,
These far-off wastelands and tribal domains yield us menials and female
slaves.

232

Particularities

We’ve converted their spy posts along the frontiers to ofﬁcial providers of
maps,
And for hundreds of miles, both this way and that, have abundance of rice
from our paddies.
Racial and cultural contempt, expropriation, and the imposition of a changed
environment.
A delight in the new colonial settlements was expressed in the ﬁrst half of
the eighteenth century by Chang'an, a Manchu bannerman. Note that ‘people’
here means ‘Chinese’ (in the broad sense, including Manchus), and that the
same holds true for ‘homes’. ‘Fogs’ is a metaphor for the Miao presence and
their culture. He says:63
Below one’s feet one dimly glimpses the crows winging home to roost.
The back of one’s ears is gently washed by the cumulus swiftly moving.
There are roads going up the rockface. The boulders serve them as
ladders.
No walls protect the high-perched markets. The mountain mists are
adequate.
The villages are haphazardly placed. Their locations are irregular.
People’s characters are without affectation. Simplicity brings them
contentment.
By sweeping away the barbarian fogs, the frontiers have been extended.
Countless homes delight in the proclamations that announce the army’s
successes.

The post-conquest reshaping of the aesthetic and cartographic
landscape
Outsiders entering Guizhou for the ﬁrst time were startled at what they found.
When the same Chang'an rode in on horseback, he wrote these lines, probably
referring to the karst limestone pinnacles:64
Obliquely implanted, the tapering summits are strangely shaped and
placed;
Hanging in balance, the precipice walls form multiple fortress gates.
Disordered pine trees hug the slopes, as the rain ﬁrst clears away;
Before the old postal relay doors, fogs make the hour seem late.
Lightning strikes on the tops of the crags, pouring down hundreds of
streams;

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

233

The blue-green confusions of sunken depressions are ﬁlled with
millennial trees.
Apart from the postal relay, which was part of the imperial courier service, the
driving force behind the ﬁrst reliable roads, it was an unfamiliar world.
Comparison with better-known parts of China was a common reaction.
Zou Yigui, a high Court ofﬁcial of the mid-eighteenth century known for his
paintings of ﬂowers and landscapes, wrote about the way Guizhou streams
played hide-and-seek.65 ‘Wu’, in the translation that follows, is the old name for
the lower Yangzi valley. A ‘gill’ is a northern English term for a small ravine or
sinkhole, usually with a stream in it. It seems the most likely sense of a word
meaning ‘throat’ in the original.
My native Wu is rich in waters, Guizhou is rich in mountains,
But mountains that have no waters are mountains that have no life.
One feels nothing in the forests’ depths but the weight of the mists about
one,
There are many gills, but none wide enough for more than one hare to hide in.
So a trickle that ﬂows some miles
A few miles further on runs dry,
All of its bubbling ripples having plunged away underground.
Guizhou was in fact well supplied with rivers, but not with water in the quantities to which a native of the Yangzi delta was accustomed.
The most exuberant evocation of the Guizhou landscape is the rhapsody
“Other Mountains” by the seventeenth-century monk Qian Bangqi. The title
in one sense means exactly what it says: Guizhou’s mountains are unlike those
anywhere else. It is also a reference to a phrase in the Scripture of Songs:66 “the
stones of other mountains.” In this sense it can also mean ‘let others serve as
grindstones’, that is, be ofﬁcials.67 It is important to remember that Chinese
descriptive prose-poems were, by the conventions of the genre, exhibitions of
virtuoso verbal prowess, awash with onomatopoeia, and imaginative excess. It
is necessary to allow for this when reading them as possible guides to reality.
Guizhou was, however, uniquely suited to this sort of exaggeration.
Qian had his path and his views cleared for him, presumably by unmentioned servants using ﬁre or equipped with axes, much as some early painters
of the Australian landscape found it necessary to do a couple of hundred years
later.68 From the environmental point of view these lines testify to the density
of the tree cover in the places he visited. Psychologically they provide insight
into what Qian felt was the deeper signiﬁcance of the wild mountainscape: the
structure of cosmic forces was more nearly visible here than elsewhere.69 But
whose cosmic forces?

234

Particularities

My eyes have looked upon the empire’s vast extent,
Landscape’s eccentricities having absorbed my heart.
But Guizhou, off the beaten path, a domain of wilderness,
Is the strangest in its excitement, and in its heights and depths,
With pinnacles uplifted clear, and precipitous descents,
Majestically scarped, yet tortuously bent.
And, for myself, forgetting the burden of sense and cognition,
I have chanced on a secluded spot where my footprints will be hidden.
To this uncanny domain heart and spirit are both committed:
I remove the vegetation up the winding mountain paths,
And burn off thorny brambles to clear the meandering hilltops.
Multitudinous altitudes are here revealed before me,
Assembled together, ahead and behind, elevated and awesome.
I make the ascent to the highest point, to gaze out into the distance,
Sensing how swiftly the serried summits sink down in subordination,
How clouds and mists open and close, assuming ten thousand forms,
Aether-wrought images of illusion, metamorphoses not to be caught.
The redoubled peaks in zigzag patterns are hard to travel across,
Almost too dark for investigation the repetitive caves and grottoes.
The unrestrained rush of the twisting brooks tosses up torrents of
froth;
Sudden landslips in the huge ravines can love-crush living bodies.
Obscurely, I glimpse Earth’s Axis, that binds the fabric together,
Far away, I intuit the support of the upright Pillar of Heaven.
Qian’s feelings may be summed up in the words of Wang Xing, the author of
a prose-poem on a spring in Guizhou. Wang remarked of the scene before him
that “This is the mirror of the true message of the Transforming Force.”70 The
Transforming Force was an ancient Daoist concept, like that of an invisible but
omnipresent smith perpetually turning one thing in nature into another, but
not the creator of the universe. Contemplation of the landscape thus had a
religious character. But a new religion, a new metaphysics.
Qian was also describing what was in Chinese terms, though not those of
the Miao, a primal wilderness untouched by human hand. Scholarly opinion
tends to regard the Chinese as having found true ‘wilderness’ unattractive.
Qian, however, seems to have been comfortable with it. He goes on:
Thickets of pine trees and junipers, leaning against each other,
With the cypress and the Chinese ﬁrs, screen out the glare of the sun.

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

235

Bamboos in some spots are far apart, elsewhere they are densely huddled,
So, in complement, the ﬂowering plants grow irregularly among them.
After talking about the streams, he goes on:
Lofty willows ﬂourish in clumps by the water’s wide expanses,
Their boughs and branches casting shadows over the ﬂooding channels.
Tendrils trail on the surface from the lily-like ﬂoating plants,71
Unrolling their leaf blades, lettuce and celery stretch out their spikelets
aslant.
The twittering birds are heard above, up in the forest twigs,
While, among the reeds and water-grain, duck and widgeon dive and nibble.
The line of peaks is reﬂected inverted, in the deeps below the ripples,
Where, implanting their roots in the lake’s perspective, hang the
suspended cliffs.72
Qian is at his ease in what seems to him an unspoiled paradise.
The bizarre shapes taken by the Guizhou rocks are intoxicating. The catalogcadenza, with its accelerated rhythm, in which he describes them, is too long
to be given in full. A few lines convey its exuberance:
Unique the weird boulders, here agglomerated,
From Earth wrenched out, and Heaven’s vault impaling.
Some, plinths that can’t be budged, are Atlas-solid,
Others, like inclined buns of hair, about to tumble off,
Some, not quite level, calender-rollers wobbling,
Some, vertical perversely, have bottoms above their tops.
Some appear coiled-up dragons, others tigers bursting forth,
Some seem a mounting roc, or else a phoenix soaring.
‘Atlas’ here is a Westernized equivalent of Beixi, a river god depicted as a
tortoise and believed capable of bearing great weights on his back. The
Chinese traditionally calendered cloth by rocking massive smoothed stones on
it—this hardened the surface and improved its resistance to wear. The ‘roc’,
found in The Thousand and One Nights, is a Western equivalent of the great
peng bird of ancient Chinese fables.
Qian Bangqi is perceiving what is to him a new world through Chinese
conceptions. He is also, though unaware of it, a cultural conquistador obliterating an earlier vision.
The mapmakers saw the same landscape differently again. This can be seen
from the introduction to the 1850 gazetteer for Guiyang prefecture. By this date

236

Particularities

there was a growing taste for precision. The compilation is almost a Domesday
Book: an inventory of topography, settlements, plants and animals, population, taxes, and so on, with tersely worded biographies of past ofﬁcials and
virtuous women, and only occasional ﬂashes of color.
Grids had been known by Chinese mapmakers since at least Pei Xiu in the
third century ce,73 though little used in gazetteer maps, perhaps because of the
demanding nature of the surveying required. These maps, however, are all
constructed on grids, with thirty-kilometer spacing for the prefecture as a
whole, and ten-by-ten squares for smaller spatial units. The tone of voice of
the compilers is one of frustration at the difﬁculty of bringing so chaotic a
place under cartographic conceptual control:74
Making maps is hard, but mapping Guizhou province especially so. . . .
Even if one is familiar with Mr Pei Xiu’s six canons of cartography one
will still ﬁnd it impossible to ﬁnish the job of mapping southern Guizhou.
The reason for this is that there are numerous deep gorges in southern
Guizhou. Confronted with the way they go down and in, and the two sides
seem to close together above one, if there are no others to help or inform
one, how can one get down to enter them?
Southern Guizhou has numerous underground streams. If one is faced
with determining where they are interrupted and where they run continuously, since it is difﬁcult to ascertain where sources reappear repeatedly, if
one does not have others to help or inform one how can one hasten quickly
to survey the arterial pattern of the waterways? This is why the courses of
the rivers that appear in past registers of inquiry sometimes have a source
but no outlet, or an outlet but no source, or else have both a source and an
outlet but no tributary streams ﬂowing into them, or, alternatively, do have
tributary streams but no proper sequence for them to make their entry into
the river. . . .
The land in southern Guizhou has fragmented and confused boundaries. . . . A department or a county may be split into several subsections, in
many instances separated by other departments or counties. A jurisdiction
may sometimes jump half a kilometer, at other times ﬁve hundred,75 before
returning to what it was to begin with. There are also regions of no man’s
land where the Miao live intermixed with Chinese. This is even true outside
some outer suburbs of cities or former barriers at passes. The villages and
camps are no different. Their jurisdictions may be divided in as many as
three or four different ways. . . .
Roads in southern Guizhou are as plentiful as thickets of bamboo, but of
indeterminate lengths. They are blocked off by mountain cliffs, and in some

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

237

cases may twist and turn ﬁve hundred times in the space of ﬁfty kilometers.
The ofﬁcial routes and imperial relay highways do have a degree of systematic pattern. One no longer has to pace out the distances through the closepressing ravines and remote wastes. On them too, though, a distance of ﬁfty
kilometers on the road may only amount to half or a third of this in a direct
line. . . .
Southern Guizhou has a multitude of mountain peaks. They are jumbled
together, without any plains or marshes to space them out, or rivers or
watercourses to put limits to them. They are vexingly numerous and illdisciplined.76 . . . Very few people dwell among them, and generally the peaks
do not have names. Their conﬁgurations are difﬁcult to discern clearly, ridges
and summits seeming to be the same. Those who give an account of the
arterial pattern of the mountains are thus obliged to speak at length. In some
cases, to describe a few kilometers of ramiﬁcations needs a pile of documentation, and dealing with the main line of a day’s march takes a sequence
of chapters. . . .
As to the confusion of local patois, in the space of ﬁfty kilometers a river
may have ﬁfty names, and an encampment covering a kilometer and a half
may have three designations. Such is the unreliability of nomenclature!
Two different faces of the same quest for mastery.

The colonial administrator’s perspective
What sort of a prefecture would a newly appointed local ofﬁcial, concerned
with taxes, farm production and hence weather, and maintaining good order,
have expected to encounter when he arrived? Consulting the section in the
1850 gazetteer on the place of the region in the universe—fenye, which signiﬁed
relating it to the stars thought to rule its destiny—he would have found the
following items of information:77
The Southern Ridge winds its way between Guangshun, Guizhu, Guiyang,
Dingfan, and Guiding [all cities in the central part of the prefecture], being
the spine of the high mountains. For this reason the prefecture is cold, but
since it is near the south it is also warm. Heat and cold are well accommodated to each other, and, contrary to expectation, the climate is equable.
The winter cold is not intense, nor the heat in summer oppressive. North
of the Southern Ridge there is no malaria. Luoxie county, which is the
furthest south in the prefecture, being situated on the Hongshui River,78

238

Particularities

does intermittently have malaria. Kaizhou and Xiuwen are the most
northerly [in the northeast and northwest of the prefecture respectively],
and suffer from ‘cold epidemics’ but not to any great extent.
The nature of the ‘cold epidemics’ is unclear. What is evident is that the
Southern Ridge, which was the main watershed, divided Guiyang into two
epidemiologically different halves.
The gazetteer then continues, at ﬁrst in a practical mode and later in what
we would call a metaphysical mode, but this distinction would have made little
sense to a Chinese reader of premodern times. He or she would in most cases
have seen all the comments as equally down-to-earth:
This is a land where there is frequent rain in the mornings. The weather is
constantly overcast on this account, and rain sufﬁces for the enrichment of the
soil. The mountains are lofty, and the streams deep, with extremely little
horizontal ground. Hence the proverbial saying: “Never three days of clear
skies, nowhere three feet of ﬂat land.” Because of the altitude the seasons
come rather late.
All of the main watercourses . . . run sunken far down, with precipitous
banks on both sides. Little beneﬁt is had from man-made channels or dikes.
Enrichment of the soil by water relies entirely on rain from the skies. For
this reason, if during the farming season no rain falls for ﬁve days, then
people offer prayers . . . .
In the valleys of the mountain torrents, the sun and moon are hidden
from sight. Because of the concealed reserves of the Dark–Female Principle
there is a lot of hail. The land is solely dominated by the Feminine–
Chthonic Force in the form of high mountains, the ‘cords of the earth’.
Hence the great extent of docile accommodation in people’s characters and
the numbers of spirit mediums who call down supernatural beings. This is
due to the abundance of the Dark–Female Principle.
The Dark–Female Principle is the yin of archaic Chinese metaphysics, and the
Feminine–Chthonic is the kun hexagram from the ancient divining manual, the
Book of Changes. There is a dual sense in the Chinese term kunwei. It can be taken
either as ‘the cords of the earth’, that is, high mountains, or as ‘the kun principle’.
The spirit mediums, who called down demons or the souls of the deceased,
put on dramatic shows, with drums and gongs, and sent off ‘yellow letters’ to
the world of the dead.79 Zhu Gong, who served as a local ofﬁcial in nearby
southwest Hu'nan province in the eighteenth century, wrote a poem on them
entitled “The Miao Make Offerings to the Spirits: A Warning Against
Improper Sacriﬁces.”80 His attitude of cultural, social, and racial disdain is
evident, yet one side of him relishes the spectacle:

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

239

With whinnying clangor the gongs are booming,
As bronze drums beat out their repetitive rhythms,
They summon the mediums in pell-mell confusion,
Tricked out as tigers in odd, motley, mimicry,
Dangling red aprons are tied round their belts,
In pleats bound on their brows hang blue-green silk tassels,
Back-country serfs who leap with forked gestures,
Menials from caves who cavort with arms brandished.
They pretend to be generals, play-act ferocity,
Then bow to their elders, loose hair in disorder.
Girls from the village wear clasps of mixed blossoms,
Lads from the hills tie their clothes on with straw,
From masts of bamboo there droop paper pennants.
The clay pots on display contain betel peppers.
With rowdy guffaws they offer a pig’s head,
And using a rope-hoist they roast roosters’ feathers.
Purple clouds of sweet smoke gust denser and denser,
The white raindrops spraying as charmed water’s sprinkled,
But the savages’ babbling is incomprehensible
As they get drunk, and stuffed, for their spirit’s epiphany.
I have heard that when teaching the vulgar behavior
One’s model for ritual’s that of the ancients:
A magnanimous face, and severe, sober vestments,
Obeisances courteous, and strict patterned steps.
One’s words given weight by fasting and abstinence,
One spreads out dried meat, and wine, pure and fragrant,
Showing utmost respect, with no breath of blasphemy —
This it is brings good luck, this of reverence the basis.
Offerings otherwise offered delight not the spirits.
If the ritual is lost, they beneﬁt nothing.
So one proffers Hippuris to monarch and ministers,
Greets the Farm God with clods, tapping on a clay drum.
How then can one cleanse these barbarians of their sooty moral grime,
And list them in the Zhou lineage so renowned in ancient rhyme?
The last line refers to the section in the Scripture of Songs that tells of the
founding of the Zhou state from which thirteen generations later the imperial

240

Particularities

Zhou dynasty was to spring. Not all the details in the rest of the poem can be
so easily explained—why, for example, burn chicken’s feathers?—but it is
worth recalling that the leaves of the betel pepper were chewed with the betel
nut and lime as a recreational drug.81 Hippuris, or mare’s tail, is a water plant.
The shift of apparent attitude slightly after the halfway point is something
one ﬁnds in a number of other poems of this age that touch on the demotic or
unconventional. Here it is the concluding homage to Confucian rectitude that
allows both poet and listener to enjoy with a good tourist conscience the
colorful vigor of barbarism. But Zhu Gong’s hauteur is not assumed. He is
convinced that the Miao should be assimilated into the mainstream of proper
Chinese culture.
Chinese ofﬁcials’ attitudes were at times more complex than this poem
suggests. Some of them expressed admiration for the “generous virtue” of the
Miao, and observed that while their “customs” were “savage and barbaric,”
their “character” was “honest and straightforward.”82 He Jingming wrote a set
of poems on the villagers “in the south part of the Ping Barrage” in Ming
times.83 A phrase in the last line but one, which means ‘outside the transforming inﬂuences of Chinese civilization’, suggests they were most likely
Miao. This is however a guess. In Ming times Ping Barrage was a garrison area
in the western part of Guiyang, with a primarily non-Chinese population. He
ﬁrst describes the village turned in upon itself in the cold of the fall:
Beside the forest in the fall, congealed under falling snow,
A ﬁne sprinkling of raindrops moistens the thatched huts.
The village outskirts are now as far as they’ll let the livestock go
So that the cattle, and the sheep, remain in touch with each other.
The ﬂowers have long since fallen from the trees in their spacious orchards,
And the leveled paddy-ﬁelds spread out, under a cloud-dark sky.
Neither the adults, nor youngsters — now — will venture out of doors,
But affectionately experience the delight of like in like.
There are philosophical echoes of northern Chinese antiquity in this seasonal
familial seclusion. He then evokes the virtuous simplicity of their lives:
Immense the depths of the water, held in the age-old reservoir.
The chill of the sunset hour makes its green color more intense.
Beyond the hillslope ﬁelds, we glimpse the people who dwell here,
And the vines that grip the straw-roofed shacks under their twisting tendrils.
They break off a few stalks of rice, for a meal to offer a visitor,
And collect the wood for a ﬁre by chopping a long-dead trunk,
While wielding their poles of bamboo, the children

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

241

Run through the midst of the rain, driving the chickens and ducks.
In this realm of no signiﬁcance, outside of civilized culture,
Natural living survives, still primal and unsullied.
The observed reality is interfused with the Daoist dream of a simple, anarchiststyle, village society. Maybe, like Tacitus deriding Roman effete corruption by
contrasting it with the straightforward vigor of the Germans, he was also
implying criticism of his own Chinese world. But, as we know from other parts
of the world, it is not uncommon for a colonial administrator both to admire
and to condescend to those whom he governs.

Farming
Guizhou’s Chinese-style premodern economic growth came late. The 1741
provincial gazetteer was still wistfully observing that84
Guizhou has few local products, and the standard of living is meager. The
people do not have reserves of grain to see them out to the end of the year.
Thus if one calculates the population of the thirteen prefectures of Guizhou
there are only 200,000 [households], and the soils are stony. . . .
Nonetheless, a time comes when the aethers in the mountains and
streams open. When the Huai-Hai region [Jiangsu province north of the
Yangzi] was in ‘Yangzhou’ province in the time of the Tribute Sent to Yu, its
land was then graded as the lowest of the low, . . . but since the Tang and the
Song dynasties, its wealth has been foremost in the empire.85 How can it not
be the case that when population grows dense the land will then be developed, and that when this happens there will be an abundance of produce?
Brave optimism, given pressure from a difﬁcult climate as well as resentful
natives, a terrain cursed with rivers too swift to navigate and regarded at this
date as unsuitable for supplying irrigation systems,86 and with famines and
major epidemics becoming more frequently recorded during the sixteenth
century.87 Nonetheless, it proved well-founded. By late Qing times, Guiyang at
least had some developed irrigation systems. According to an earlier account
quoted in the late-nineteenth-century gazetteer:88
Those of Guiyang’s paddy-ﬁelds whose springs of water overﬂow all year
long without running dry are called ‘overﬂow ﬁelds’. At places along the
banks of rivers they weave bamboo into wheels and use them to lift the
water; these are called ‘water-pump ﬁelds’. Where the land is level they build
dikes so that water can be retained or drained as needed, these being called

242

Particularities

‘diked ﬁelds’. Where land lies below cliffs over which streams cascade down
and may be drawn off for irrigation, they call these ‘cold-water ﬁelds’. Where
water is stored in ponds, and may be released when there is dry weather
these are called ‘reservoir-pond ﬁelds’. Where mountain springs gush forth,
and well water may be used for irrigation, these are called ‘well-ﬁelds’.
Where the mountains are high and water is lacking, so that they can only
rely on moisture from the rain, they call them ‘dry ﬁelds’, or ‘ﬁelds that look
up to the heavens’. Where the ﬁelds rise up in successive levels, they call
them ‘ladder ﬁelds’. Where the ﬁelds extend obliquely, bending and winding,
they call them ‘waistband ﬁelds’.
The water pumps were norias, huge open-work wheels with pots mounted on
their rims, emptying into a ﬂume at the top of the rotation, and driven at the
bottom by the current. They do not require an input of human energy such
as was needed for treadle-pumps in Jiaxing. In some places, however, the
precipitous banks of rivers made water-control installations impracticable,
and “enrichment of the soil by water relies entirely on the rain from the
skies.”89
The farming calendar reveals a simpler system than Jiaxing’s:90
In the ﬁrst moon, during the Rain Water period in late February, the tong
trees91 and the chestnut oaks92 all bear their nuts [used, respectively, to make
an oil for waterprooﬁng and a black dye]. In this moon they pull out the
roots remaining from the previous year’s wheat, and the broad beans compete
with each other to blossom.
In the second moon, after the Spring Equinox, when it happens to rain,
the irrigated ﬁelds are plowed, and water lifted into the ladder ﬁelds. As
regards the handling of the dry ﬁelds, if there is a lot of rain, they store the
water in ponds, so as to prevent the supply being exhausted. In this moon
the wheat and barley ﬁll out their seedheads, millet is planted, spring buckwheat dibbled in, and early grain [probably oats—see the ninth moon]
sown broadcast.
In the third moon, during the Clear and Bright period in early April, they
ﬁrst sow the rice. After the Grain Rains period in late April they bank up the
raised paths between the paddies to retain the water in readiness for transplanting. In this moon the wheats form their spikelets, and the broad beans
and garden peas ﬁll with seeds. Buckwheat sprouts appear above the
ground. They plant the barnyard millets.93
In the fourth moon, during the Summer Begins period in early May, they
transplant the rice. Barley is harvested in this moon, and buckwheat ﬁrst
forms kernels.

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

243

In the ﬁfth moon, during the Grain In Ear period in early June all the
planting of the cereals and vegetables is ﬁnished. They plant soybeans,
lentils, and green lentils. They reap the buckwheat and harvest the wheat.
In the sixth moon the heat is intense. They wear clothes of ﬁne or coarse
linen. During this moon the barnyard millets grow at furious speed, while
the rice begins to ﬁll out.
In the seventh moon, the days are hot but the nights cool. If it rains, the
daytime is also cool. The early rice is reaped in this moon, and the fall buckwheat dibbled in.
In the eighth moon, in the White Dew period of early September, the late
rice develops full ears. All the rice is harvested in this moon, and the early
barnyard millet reaped.
In the ninth moon, in the Cold Dew period during early October the
harvesting of the rice is ﬁnished. The wild oats are yellow and hang their
ears.94 The beanstalks wither. The red variety and the ti variety of barnyard
millet form kernels. The farmers at this point spade the ﬁelds in order to
disperse the energy–vitality of the soil. In this moon they reap the wild oats,
some of the beans, and the millet. They pick the barnyard millets, and plant
the wheat and barley, and the winter vegetables.
In the tenth moon they put on their furs for the ﬁrst time. In this moon
they plant broad beans and garden peas.
In the eleventh moon, the farmers rest for the ﬁrst time. In this moon the
broad beans and the garden peas appear above the ground.
In the twelfth moon the cold is severe, though if the sky is clear there is
some warmth. In this moon the snow melts and the wheats appear.
Scrutiny of these dates suggests that, unlike Jiaxing, two different crops would
not generally have been grown at different seasons in the same ﬁeld. (Buckwheat, growing from the second to ﬁfth months, may have left time for a
second crop, but the need for rotation makes this unlikely.) Apart from rice
and wheat, they relied on tough but low-yielding cereals that are not particularly tasty, and on one, the barnyard millet, that can develop fast, seeding after
a few weeks’ growth in some cases, though here over four months’.95
Miao farming was sometimes simpler still. They prepared high-lying land for
crops merely by setting it on ﬁre. Jiang Yingke, in Ming times, recorded this in
a poem, then added in another one:96
On the sheer cliffs, the scars of burning grow green once the rain has fallen,
And sweet the smell of last year’s rice, husked by pounding in the mortar.
The Miao also had the environmental buffer provided by being able to supplement their food supply by hunting. Wu Guolun, an ofﬁcial and poet of the

244

Particularities

sixteenth century, made this point in an incidental way in the third line of the
following quatrain:97
First one then the next, atop steep banks, we pass doubly enclosed
barricades,
With moats and with walls — so they seem — on their ramparts, of closeset wooden palings.
They use knives for plowing. Remaining energy’s spent on the shoot and
the chase.
They behead cocks for sacriﬁce, rat-a-tat drums, and take idols around
on parade.
It is not clear what they hunted. Wild pigs are quite often mentioned as being
in Guizhou, but the most likely quarry was deer. Wang Yangming’s98 lines
on “The Bamboo Thickets at Muge” suggest that these may have been quite
numerous in the sixteenth century:99
Once off on a path of his own, my tired horse — climbs up with unequaled
speed.
The layers of cumulus gently cover the tops of the interlinked peaks.
In the mountain hamlet the ﬂock of crows is disturbed by the gloom in
the trees.
In dense mists on the track along the ravine, we meet with a herd of deer.
In other words, the Miao could to some still extent feed themselves off nature,
even if they had long become mainly farmers and herders.
One of the most momentous, yet all but invisible, psychological changes in
human history has been the intensiﬁcation of a sense of insecurity and alienation from the world around us that arose when we became no longer able
easily to get food in a few hours just by gathering it, or hunting it, but had to
organize ourselves in a purposeful fashion simply to survive. This change is
undocumented, though occasional clues can be gained about it from the
comments of the few still alive who have lived through a version of it, such as
old Australian Aboriginals. Its essence is subjection to a pervasive but unacknowledged, indeed unnamed, fear.100 It is the foundation of civilization.

Bitter treasures
Minerals were one of the prizes that drew Chinese workers and merchants into
Guizhou. One product that was exclusive to the province, and nearby parts of
Hu'nan and Sichuan, was cinnabar. Cinnabar is mercuric sulﬁde (HgS), and

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

245

the only common source of quicksilver or mercury. Its main traditional uses
were in medicine, traditional religious preparations (against nightmares, for
example), and metallurgy. It was also important in Chinese alchemy, because
the way in which cinnabar and mercury can apparently be turned back and
forth into each other suggested that it held the secret of constancy in the midst
of change.101 The ore was also used to make a coloring material.
There were cinnabar mines in Guiyang, located in Kaizhou, also known as
Kaiyang, in the north of the prefecture. Workings further north still are
described in Tian Wen’s Book of Guizhou, a series of short essays on the
province in late-Ming and early-Qing times:102
From the barrage to the Yang River and the Re River is more than twentyﬁve kilometers, and all along the route there are ore workings. The ore from
the Yang and the Re takes the visual form of arrowheads and arrowshafts,
while that of the Useful Ore Barrage takes the form of axes and the surfaces
of mirrors. These are its commonplace forms.
Those who select ores must examine the images that they present. If they
seem to be like gourds or calabashes, or like the jointed segments of
bamboo, they follow them in. Those shafts excavated downwards into the
ground are termed ‘wells’. Those that proceed in on the level are termed
‘levels’. Those that rise straight upwards for some height are termed ‘lights’.103
Those that slope smoothly down are termed ‘oxen sucking up water’
[perhaps because of seepage]. In all of these there are wooden props and
cover-boards overhead that make them into galleries. This done, it is
possible to give protection to the work performed with the large carryingbaskets, crowbars, hammers, picks, and mattocks. Everyone prepares an oilburning lamp for when they enter. They crawl like snakes, or like people
chasing after a lost child. They tap gingerly with their hammers [like the
fabled grave-robbing Confucian trying to tap the pearl out of the mouth of
a dead man without damaging it].104 Like deer, they turn the night into dawn
with artiﬁcial light.105 This is putting out of consideration any fearful
oppression from thoughts of death and life.
If they meet with rock, they hack it away. If it is too hard for this to be
done, they heat it with coal [and then pour cold water on it, till it cracks].
They never stop until they have attained their objective. If there are
semblances of lions, great elephants [symbols of the Buddha], tigers, or
vermilion birds [phoenixes] in the shaft this signiﬁes great good fortune.
Failing these, semblances of wooden eating-bowls, baskets, or hairpins and
earrings must likewise be paid attention to. Those that are plump and heavy
are the jewels among the ore. One must not alarm any that are buried in the
ground and making a clucking noise like a hen-bird sitting on eggs. If they

246

Particularities

are startled, they will go off elsewhere. In general, when ores ﬂee away, there
is a sound like the wind in the pine trees, neither loud not soft.
Everyone considers the top grade of ore to have a crystalline luster. These
are those called the ‘color of hibiscus ﬂowers’.
When they have carried the ore out of the workings on their backs, they
throw it into water to be scoured and rinsed. They then agitate it on beds
and toss it about in sieves. Once cleansed it is ﬁltered through sackcloth. In
due course they sublimate it in a dry retort106 from which the liquid either
accumulates in a pool or is drawn off through pipes. It ‘passes over the
ridges and ranges’ of the rising and falling condensation pipes and drop by
drop falls from the ‘heaven above’.
How much is obtained depends on fate. The opening and closing of the
earth depend on the season. Whether the ore is coarse or ﬁne depends on its
intrinsic substance.
The mineral was being hunted, as if it were alive.
Tian Wen’s prose-poem on cinnabar puts the mining and reﬁning into a
historical, philosophical, alchemical, and social context.107 It also shows how
the substantial industrial and commercial system that produced and traded
cinnabar was based on pseudo-science, fashion, and superstition. Many of our
own commercial obsessions, and many useless or harmful products, will probably look equally bizarre in the course of time. The items referred to in the last
line but one of the stanza are probably cosmetics.
As to ‘vermilion ore’, the term ﬁrst occurs
In The Tribute Sent to Yu — the passage that refers
To whetstones from Jingzhou, and to arrowheads of ﬂint.
Blended in scarlet lacquer, it confers on it its ﬁnish,
An unvarying milky substance, yet one whose shapes are different,
Composed of unalike purple ﬂorets whose every facet’s similar,
Reﬁned, it yields us ‘crimson snow’, and also rouge-hued paste,
Or else the magic pill of immortals’ isles and caves.
After dwelling for a while on this Daoist search for physical immortality he
describes the fever of the local cinnabar-rush. The cowry shell, used in archaic
China as a form of currency, is a symbol of wealth.
If one looks into the question of where it’s mined, and treated,
No one region stands out as unique.
Ore issues from the slopes below the two You peaks,108
Where, underneath the hot springs, it slumbers buried deep.

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

247

This is familiar news enough, but not until recently,
When I arrived in Guizhou, did I have the chance to see it.
By the Qian and Pan rivers, at Wuchuan, and Copper Cliffs,
Are places it can be obtained, if one only does the digging.
But these workings open suddenly, then shut down as abruptly.
Kaiyang, here, surpasses them in having an abundance.
That’s why rascals who anticipate they can glean miraculous proﬁts,
And those selling dear and buying cheap, that is — gentlemen and
scholars —
All race to be here ﬁrst, set their hearts on mountain fogs,
And come with carts and horses, having driven hither headlong,
Then wheel and deal to hire their men through the guarantorcontractors,
Delimit zones of operation, lay out shop-stalls to form markets,
— Like a line of worms and serpents who can follow but one track.
The many-layered sources of water are sought through the lonely
blackness.
Pit props, rising high above, give rooves to the hidden galleries.
To spy out the terrain ahead, they hold oil lamps in both hands.
Frustrated there’s no way to tell whether it’s dawn or dusk,
They no longer think it worth a thought — if they live, or they
succumb.
When on a sudden, sticking out, they see ore in pointed blades,
It’s like stumbling across a cowry, where, with rocks and soil displaced,
It rests drowsily on its mineral bed, as if half inebriated.
Some are like barbs of arrows,
Others like choppers or axes,
Else seeming a mirror ﬂashing,
Or intensely black, like lacquer,
Orange red like sparkling ﬁre.
But every color’s brighter.
The Daoist in cloud-patterned mantle, spirit focused, extracts the drops,
And stores them to separate the essence, where ﬁre’s potency’s embodied.
He ends this section by observing
And, since it banishes bad dreams, foul vapors, and all things vicious,
Rich merchants, and famous families, gladly buy it in every city.

248

Particularities

After sketching the work at the mines, with “ladders going up and wellropes going down,” Tian next points to the pollution caused by mercury
production:
Old countrymen, between villages, live alone by the torrents’ banks,
With baling-pans and inlet pipes straining tailings and gathering
fragments.
But their toes are rotting away, though the water they stand in’s
transparent;
For all that their eyes are running with tears, even so their pupils are
damaged.
The ripples are everywhere reddened, on account of these activities,
And what they do stains their jacket sleeves the color of vermilion.
If by chance they happen to obtain the minutest scruple of cinnabar,
Even for something next to nothing, they forthwith become giddily
frivolous.
Mercury poisoning can cause the ‘mad hatter’ syndrome, whose principal
symptoms are timidity, and loss of memory and concentration.109 This seems
to be what Tian is referring to here, though the wording of the text would also
permit the interpretation that the old men, having acquired a little modest
wealth, ‘have the audacity to be impudent’.
The industry was growing in late Ming times:
Stoves have been built just recently, and furnaces erected.
Milling rollers have been installed; so, too, have pounding pestles.
Our red dye, when it is pulverized, “is unalloyed and bright.”110
And sublimated, ore turns to rain, scattering sweat as it perspires.
The last line refers to the production of the quicksilver.
There is the usual change of tone at the end. Cinnabar, says Tian, “satisﬁes
neither ears nor eyes with enjoyment.” It has “perverted the transmission of
the spirit of concern with daily necessities.” It has also caused trouble for the
government. He wants its production to be permanently banned, and asks,
rhetorically, “How could this cause any distress to the mountains and the
valleys?” A comment appended by Ding Wei, an ofﬁcial and poet who
ﬂourished in early Qing, adds a philosophical note:
Things that are precious always exhaust people in their efforts to get hold of
them. . . . Alas! Heaven and Earth give birth to materials basically for the
purpose of proﬁting humankind, but when those collecting them have
become worn out, those demanding them are not yet weary of them. At this
point advantage gives rise to harm.

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

249

The section that follows111 describes the techniques of distillation or sublimation, that is, producing a gas from a solid directly. It ends by alluding to the
possible ill-effects on health of exposure to mercury vapor, observing that
“those who open either the caldrons or the ﬁred tiles always hold a leek in their
mouths, or juice from meat pickled with its bones. If they do not do this, their
teeth will drop out when they encounter the vaporous energy–matter.” Manmade chemical hazards to health predated modern times. I will pass over the
technical details except to note that the process has similarities to some of the
German methods described in the De Re Metallica of Georg Bauer, or ‘Agricola’, published in 1555.112
Tian ends with a return to the alchemical theme:
If mercury that has already been made in ﬁnished form is distilled, it can
once again be made into cinnabar [when it cools]. It does not forget that
which it fundamentally is. Natural mercury also arises from inside cinnabar,
and does not need to be heated and puriﬁed in order to form. This type is
exceedingly difﬁcult to obtain, and is the material for elixirs for the transformation of mortals into immortals.
Changelessness within change, hence the embodiment of the secret of immortality within mortality.
It was an illusion. Cinnabar, when heated, converts to mercuric oxide which
then decomposes at about 500° Celsius, so yielding mercury. The reverse process,
needing from between 300° to 350°, would have made not cinnabar again but red
mercuric oxide, using oxygen from the atmosphere, as the sulfur needed would
largely have been lost after the initial processing. This oxide could have then be
turned back into mercury at 500°, apparently demonstrating changelessness
within change, as, at the primitive level of chemical understanding described
here, the oxygen drawn from the air was invisible to the mind’s eye.113
Xie Zhaozhe, the late-Ming collector of curiosa, was blunt about the damage
done by cinnabar-based longevity pills.114 In his Fivefold Miscellany of 1608 he
says that if taken for any great length of time they kill people, the effect being
“like tossing lime into a ﬁre.” When a contemporary of his, who took them
in his later years, died, “his skin and body were splitting apart like a grilled
ﬁsh.” Xie was puzzled by the “imperturbable stupidity” with which people
consumed them and suggested that
Those who have made a fortune and acquired social distinction have
reached the limits of their ambitions. The only goal they would still like to
attain, but cannot, is the prolongation of their lives. For this reason criminal
persons with vicious magic have a means to accommodate this desire. Their
customers would rather perish than change their ways.

250

Particularities

Another important mineral was lead. Zhao Leisheng, who ﬂourished in the
middle of the eighteenth century, has left us a description of a state-run lead
and zinc mine in Qianyang, in Hu'nan, just across the border from Guizhou.115
The poem is patently a polemic, though the problem he is addressing can now
only be guessed at from the text itself. Turning to the details, it should be noted
that zinc most commonly occurs in sphalerite (ZnS) which is often found
together with galena (PbS), the principal ore of lead. The Chinese term qian in
the ﬁrst line can refer both to zinc and to lead, and so I have rendered it with
the Latin plumbum, to convey something of the ﬂavor of the original, though,
strictly plumbum candidum, ‘white lead’, referred historically in the early
modern West to tin.
Plumbum has been produced in Qianyang since times that are now long past.
It comes in two kinds — white-colored zinc, and the darker-hued true lead.
These lie secreted out of sight beneath the deep-sunk valleys
Above which mountain forests soar — to altitudes immense.
If ﬁve miners toil to open a seam, they’ll ﬁnd the work hot and vexatious.
Their cutting of holes into Chaos amounts — in effect — to a way of
killing him.
Their pickaxes grasped in both their hands, they attack the excavation,
One foot, then the other, pushing aside a mess of disordered chippings.
Between his upper and lower jaws, each one grips hold of his lamp,
Whose ﬂame ﬂickers, and shifts about, as the faint air-currents tug it.
Twisting this way, then turning that, they pierce their way deep into
blackness
To where, through the ﬁssures in the rock, the water seeps out in
abundance.
They smash a hole in the rocky ceiling, to lower down a pump.
The dribbles rise up in mid-air, like sleet’s translucent pearls.
When they’ve heat-dried the mud that’s left behind, on the ﬂoor of the
cave, as a slurry,
It glitters like mercury globules that rest on a sandy surface.
They separate metals out in a stove that they feed with charcoal sticks.
And at times, quite unexpectedly, an auspicious ingot emerges.
The best of these are transported off, to the capital at Beijing
To be tokens of His Majesty’s favor for those who have most deserved it.
There’s been a decline in recent years in the skill of merchants at
commerce,

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

251

And contracts for taxes due to the State have not secured any takers.
In consequence, I regret to say, although the products are serviceable,
Like goods held back to raise the price, they’ve not entered circulation.
So how do we ﬁnd ofﬁcials who are competent in these matters,
And, in operations of this sort, will do a good job as managers?
The cutting of holes in ‘Chaos’ in the second stanza is an allusion to the fable
at the end of the seventh chapter of the Zhuangzi, where the well-intentioned
but ill-advised emperors of the Northern and Southern Seas attempt to repay
the physically undifferentiated Chaos, Emperor of the Center, for his hospitality. They drill seven apertures in his body that they hope will let him breathe,
see, hear, and taste like a human being. This kindness proves fatal, and Chaos
dies on the seventh day. The implication of the phrase seems at ﬁrst sight to
be that there is something unnatural and deadly about piercing the earth in
this way, but that does not seem to have been Zhao’s actual view. Most likely it
was no more than a literary ﬂourish that he had failed to think through.
The colonial frontier was thus an important source of raw materials, the
demand for which was driven, in classic fashion, by distant markets in more
developed areas. Timber was another example. A poem by a sixteenth-century
ofﬁcial116 banished to the Southwest, who then became a historian of his adopted
region,117 tells of the pressure on remote areas by this time, from even as far away
as Beijing, for trees large enough to serve as the structural members of buildings.
The Red Viper River he refers to is probably a tributary of the present-day Liuhe
River that empties into the Wujiang, which ﬂows through northeast Guizhou
into the Yangzi. Mangbu was the son of a ruler of the area in antiquity.118
The source of Red Viper River rises — from what was once Mangbu’s city.
Its forests are full of tigers and leopards, highroads for monkeys and
gibbons.
Since no route exists for traveling through — its layered ice and deep
snows,
Construction-quality towering trees still prop up the skies in the cold.
To secure the beams, and the rafters, for ritual halls and grand buildings,
Timber merchants, and masters of works, ﬁnd their way to where these are
hidden.
Since the onward rush of the current is like that of a speeding arrow,
They bundle the tree trunks into rafts and ride down to Sichuan and the
Capital.
On the order of at least 1500 kilometers in the second case, much more if
one were to allow for the meanderings of the water-transport routes, and an

252

Particularities

illustration of the environmental impact of the market more than four
hundred years ago. Colonialism, as almost always, was linked to the quest for
raw materials.

Bridges
Bridges were less common in Guizhou than in the watery lands of the lower
Yangzi, but more important. Crossing the vertiginous river gorges by fording
them, or by boat, was often difﬁcult, commonly dangerous, or even impossible. In the wild natural conditions, construction could be a heroic undertaking. Maintenance and renewal of the structures demanded more money
and redoubled determination. As elsewhere in China, building a bridge was an
act of local charity, and one of the few areas of public works where individual
initiative had some degree of free play outside the constraints of ofﬁcial organization. Tian Wen’s account of Ge Jing’s Bridge illustrates many of these
points.119 The details of the rituals of folk-religion connected with Ge Jing’s
oath are unclear, but mentioning them is essential to the story: sincerity moves
the spirits who control the natural world.
Two-and-a-half kilometers east of Pingyue [northeast of Guiyang] two
mountains form barriers, one on each side, being the elevated banks of a
deep gorge. At the bottom ﬂows the Maha River, its water as opaque as glue.
Even when the winds are blowing, no ripples stir on its surface. People live
and farm among these stony cliffs, holding hands with the gibbons and
drinking the veiling mists. The mountains lie in gloom, such that one rarely
glimpses the stars or the sun. Birds are rare, goblins numerous. People in
ages past chiseled the rock away to open a road, with ropes suspended to
enable travelers to cross from one side to the other. . . .
Today120 there is a bridge. The explanation for this is as follows. A local
man, Ge Jing, lashed together a long, rainbow-shaped frame, placed it on
foundation pillars that stood in the water, and thought the task done. Some
time after it had been built in this way, it fell down. He erected it once more,
and again it was overturned. When this happened he ate vegetarian food
and observed taboos [perhaps on sex] for a hundred days. He then
announced to the spirits of Mount Li in Yunnan and Mount E in Guangxi
that he was moving to the abode of the supernatural monsters. He led his
wife and children in making the sacriﬁce of an animal and sprinkling wine
into the river. He swore an oath to the powers above in order to make his
intentions clear: “That this bridge has not been completed is because the
river has behaved like this!”

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

253

His words were stricken with grief. His eyes bulged with fury. He resembled Shen Baoxu [who wept for seven days in the Court of the state of Qin
to persuade it to give him military help against the state of Wu that had
attacked his own state of Chu] . . . . His clothes and footwear were worn out.
His bodily frame became withered and wizened. Lu Ban and Chui
[legendary artiﬁcers, now become spirits] were moved to tears by this. In
such a fashion, after thirty years, the bridge was built.
Ge Jing’s fame on this account became extraordinary. He had also to face
difﬁculties in managing the structure. There were many defects and many
weaknesses. He nonetheless vowed that, till the day of his death, he would not
waver. He squandered the reserves accumulated by his family, and the entire
region criticized him for not caring for them. Though what he undertook to
do was hardly important enough to be mentioned, yet one can still describe
him as a heroic gentleman. Was not his lifelong resolve outstanding!
Alas! To assist the people to press forward, and to live at Court far from
home and with no thought of returning [that is, serving as an ofﬁcial] does
not seem to equal one good deed done in the back-country like this one if
an account of it is to be handed on down through the generations. Ge Jing’s
story thus also has its shaming side.
This sour conclusion is rebutted by the discussion that follows. It is observed
that “Jing’s abilities and his wisdom amounted to much more than his seeking
to make a name for himself.” Ding Wei’s commentary reinforces this point, and
stresses that Ge Jing’s moral force made an impact on the numinous aspect of
the natural world.
If an ordinary person [like Jing] sets his mind on assisting natural objects, he
will always be able to be helped by natural objects. What is more, Jing bankrupted his family to establish his renown, never altering course when faced
by manifold difﬁculties. Though his undertaking was of but little
signiﬁcance, it was still far better than ﬁercely holding on to his wealth for
his sons and grandsons to waste on drinking and gambling. Gentleman that
he was, he did good to others, and this leads to the opposite conclusion.
Let me describe the dangers in making that bridge: it was as if demons
howled along the cloud-swathed escarpments, and gibbons screamed amid
the snow-bound deﬁles. Let me tell you how his painful resolve guided his
plans to fulﬁlment: it was like a widow who weeps alone at night ﬁrm in her
resolve to stay faithful to her husband, or the anguished cries in the dawn of
the loyal foreign counselors when told they were to be expelled from the
state of Qin. He reached the subtle essence of the spirits, and straightaway
seized control of the operations of the Transforming Power.

254

Particularities

This is a literary tour de force, embellished with scenic descriptions and
similes, and references to ancient history and the attitude of the appropriate
deities. What comes through is the impact that the building of this bridge
must have made on the local population. Tian, a Confucian ofﬁcial and hence
in the fame competition himself, is grudging about the way in which he and
his colleagues were upstaged in the popular mind by Jing’s achievement. It also
brings home just how tough it must have been to bridge the Guizhou rivers in
premodern times other than with ropes. Only possible, so the rhetoric implies,
when the exceptional sincerity of a dedicated mind could gain an ascendancy
over the responsive forces of nature.
A remarkable bridge built by government efforts was that on the main
imperial road to Yunnan. This ran southwest from Guiyang and crossed the
gorge cut by the Panjiang river in Guanling county. Its ﬁrst version was the
creation of Zhu Jiamin during the 1620s, when he was leading the campaign to
suppress the uprising of the tribesmen led by An Bangyan. It was yet another
case of development being driven by military necessity.121
The Panjiang River . . . has to be crossed by those going into Yunnan. Two
mountains ﬂank it, standing erect, while the river cuts its way between
them. Heaven placed these cliffs, a thousand feet in height, and these ﬁercely
ﬂowing currents, to mark the boundary between Yunnan and Guizhou. . . .
Those who traverse it by boat in many cases sink and are drowned.
In the Tianqi reign-period [1621–7], the provincial military intendant
Zhu Jiamin decided to build a bridge, but found it impossible to do so in
stone. He thereupon copied the method used for the Lancang River [the
Mekong] in Yunnan, and had thirty-six cables forged of iron, each several
thousand feet in length. These were threaded through rocks on each of the
two banks, and so suspended. They were covered with planks to make a
walkway like the gallery roads along the edges of cliffs in Sichuan. With this
the road was opened. It was a great achievement.
If cables are long, then they will not be strong. What is more, when people
walk along them, with their feet alternately descending on the left and
the right side, this causes the walkway to rise and fall. People’s bodies
also swayed on this account. If they looked down giddily, they could not
maintain themselves. Those riding in palanquins or on horseback had to
dismount. It was necessary for those in front to reach the opposite
bank before those behind began their ascent. If people walked closely
following one another, it was even more terrifying. The danger was
indescribable.
In recent times [that is, early Qing] it has therefore been redone in better
fashion in wood. Several hundred enormous timbers were selected, and

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

255

arranged in serried rows lying horizontally [and projecting outward] at the
landing-points on the two banks. They were held down by huge stones, and
[the parts protruding beyond the banks] were propped up by sturdy struts.
As each layer was added on it extended further out, being of a greater
length than those beneath it. Rings were bound around them to ensure
solidity. When the extremities of the timbers extending from each side were
a mere thirty-four feet apart, they further selected trees of ten feet in girth,
and crisscrossed them in trusses over this space. Once this had been done,
it was possible for two palanquins to cross side by side or two riders to
proceed with bridle-bits linked together, and in successive groups as tightly
packed as a string of ﬁsh, without any cause for alarm. Handrails were
ﬁtted, and the walkway was covered over with a housing made of boards
painted red. Buddhist shrines and monasteries were arrayed in rows to the
left and right on the banks, so dazzling that one had to shade one’s eyes
from the light. It was like a painting by the renowned Tang-dynasty landscapist Li Zhaodao, and in due course became one of the scenic attractions
of western Guizhou.
There seems no way to square the primitive method used for the wooden
bridge, which might at best have spanned a hundred or two hundred feet, with
the statement that the cables or chains of its predecessor were several thousand
feet long, though it is possible that these latter were secured at a long distance
back from the gorge. Until the site can be looked at with this problem in mind,
we have to leave it unresolved for the moment, but can note two other points.
The ﬁrst is that large trees were evidently still plentiful here in the seventeenth
century. The second is that the bridge was not simply an instrument of
Chinese imperial political domination, facilitating safe passage along the route
the imperial couriers traveled. It was also a symbol of Chinese cultural domination, with its elegant buildings housing a locally unfamiliar religion, and transforming the scene into one acceptable to Chinese sensibility, the simulacrum
of a Tang picture. Ding Wei was explicit about the bridge’s deeper function: it
was to spread civilization. “How could what was accomplished only be seen as
a bridge?” he asked rhetorically.122 Cheng Feng, in the seventeenth century, was
more pragmatic:123
Our soldiers go across it in clouds, to parry barbarian attacks,
And so, exhausting the region’s resources, do military funds and rations.
Tian’s poem on the river has a more sobering message: Guizhou was still
foreign territory for Han Chinese. The invader had always to be vigilant, or, as
in the case of the surprise attack by Yi tribesmen described here, risk paying
for his negligence with his life:124

256

Particularities

Four peaks rise up like screens, in hues of reddish ocher.
Between them crosses the river Pan, cutting a route below,
Terriﬁed waters through its gorges rushing like thousands of cattle,
While the trussed deck hangs in the sky above — a path for a single
stallion.
Old trees offer no forest shade, nor do precarious thickets,
And what traveler of the common sort would dare to peer over that
brink?
When dawn is breaking, the Yao-tribe wives come out of their deep-sunk
caverns;
Then, in broad daylight, mobs of tigers roam the woods that here are
uninhabited.
West of the depths, where the river forms pools, lie many gigantic rocks.
Is a light boat, with its puny oars, equal to such a crossing?
Sunbeams pierce to the face of the cliff. Tribesmen’s ﬁres smoke yellowish
gray.
The rain-mists steam, malaria-laden. Reddish buff run the river’s waves.
A local, of Han descent, turned to me, saying — and weeping —
“This is the place where, some time past, an army of ours was defeated.
Those then enfeoffed to guard this land cared only for goods and proﬁts,
While lust for easily gotten glory gripped leaders and lesser ofﬁcers.
“When heroes prepare a strategy, they do it in proper wise,
But even this much still holds good for villains and runaway wives!
The drums and trumpets rang to the clouds out of that army’s camp;
Their lines faced mountains to the front, with the water at their back.
“They were cooking up beef, and splashing out drink, intoxicated with
pleasure,
Arrows scattered about and crossbows forgotten, and still carousing
recklessly
When the war-horses, all of them, were turned — into dust at the foot of
this mountain,
And the warriors on campaign, each one, driven into this river to drown.
“The only ones lording it after that were the foxes and the wild boars,
As, frontier folk slaughtered and stockades sacked, the Yi turned to civil
war,
And countless homes, with their chickens and dogs, were to the last one
massacred,

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

257

And half the county cities with walls emptied of their inhabitants.”
Grieving, high over the course of the Pan, the evening sun is setting.
Yellowing wormwood is here and there. White skeletons lie about desiccated,
Their souls absorbed in each fall sky, congealed into clouds of
resentment,
Their lifeblood staining each springtime expanse, with its tall weeds of
enmity.
Only today is this alien land loyal once more to His Majesty,
High signal beacons and sunken moats are where wasteland creepers
clamber.
The shepherd lad drives his ﬂocks of sheep across the burial mounds,
While the farmer leads his oxen-team to furrow the battle grounds.
Only the wayfarer is left to utter a sigh of regret,
And, hearing tell of the river Pan, ﬁnd tears have wet his breast.
The past lingered. The ghosts of the dead soldiers and horses inhabited the
place where they had died, changing its character for those attuned to such
presences. But the past was also fading. The practical preoccupations of the
country people soon led them to forget what had once happened. Places of
memory, no less than bridges, need maintenance.

Travel and tourism
Moving around remained difﬁcult and dangerous. Ge Yilong’s poem “On the
Road to Zangge”—‘Zangge’ being an ancient name for the Guizhou region—
opens with the following depressing lines:125
Chill blows the wind through the midst of the stinging rain,
Though resistant mists still linger, hanging low over putrid water.
The watchman’s rattle startles us. From a fort and in the daytime.
— To protect our traveling after dark, we cut ﬁrewood, and truss it with
cords.
They had to be prepared to build ﬁres to help keep off wild animals. Shortly
after this he tells us that the roads were a morass, which was probably often the
case, given the amount of rainfall. At a ford,
Wading over, and going through water, is what makes the menials feel
pleased,
At once washing all of the mud off that has mired them up to their knees.

258

Particularities

The perpetual humidity of the atmosphere was part of the physical experience
of being in Guizhou. The opening lines of Huang Ke’s “Climbing East Mountain” evoke this well:126
The ﬂags along the battlements droop, being impregnated with rain.
Through the trees, and grass, by the city wall’s edge, rises a fresh morning
haze.
As the mountains gleam with an aqueous tint some hundreds of miles
away,
And chickens cheep on the river’s bank, people pass the time of day.
Some of the attitudes of mind that we associate today with tourism seem
already to be appearing. The tourist travels to look and to sample: unfamiliar
scenery, new foods, exotic peoples, transient sex. He is not there for the dayto-day business of trading or government. He may also be a pilgrim, looking
for some form of elusive enlightenment, something missing in the world at
home. A few illustrations will reveal the gamut of attitudes.
Qi Shun was a Ming ofﬁcial who lived in the ﬁfteenth century. He was
famous for ‘riding alone’ to the reception given for a Ming embassy to Korea—
in other words with no elaborate retinue—and for refusing the gifts offered to
him. Gifts so sumptuous that they were later used to pay for the building of a
‘Rejecting Gold Pavilion’ in his honor. Nonetheless Qi seems to have visited
Guizhou as a tourist, not an ofﬁcial, and he left a poem about it.127
Since my heart has been set, from boyhood, on the life of war and
weapons,
I have journeyed across the Chinese world to arrive here at Shiqian,
Where they wear grass skirts, hair rolled in buns, on civilization’s edge,
And think putting oxen and calves to the sword represents a harvest of
plenty.
Mountains open out, like a painted scroll, blue-green in the last of the rain.
In the nighttime quiet, the voice of the water lets one lay aside strings and
pipes.
An ordinary outsider — come to ﬁll no ofﬁcial vacancy,
I lean at the window, and often my soul feels as light as the clouds are
white.
The common Chinese term for tourism was ‘rambling and diverting oneself ’,
and those with a compulsive taste for scenery were labeled ‘followers of the
mists and clouds’. In Guizhou they frequented the caves in the limestone
formations, an experience they likened to being transported to one of the
mythical Chinese lands of the immortals, or the fabled rural utopia of the

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

259

‘Peach [Blossom] Spring’. An example is Chen Derong’s “Rambling around
Snowcliff Grotto.”128 The natural features of this, and other, famous caverns
were given names, some simply descriptive, but many of them drawn from
Buddhist and Daoist scriptures. Visiting them was an act not unlike the
mixture of tourism and pilgrimage, aesthetically revitalized piety, and casually
curious rubbernecking, with which many Europeans still enter their own
medieval churches and cathedrals.
It’s been said, so I’ve heard, that the River Zang’s like the Islands of the
Immortals,
A scenic trip for those addicted to loneliness pure and subtle.
With rock crenellations on every side, the ranges run off to the north,
While, under the twin-arched Lizard Bridges, the water ﬂows toward the
sunrise.
Do not open a road through the cloudbanks for the Bluebird to answer
your summons.
Rest a while in the workings of this world. Delight in these white gulls.
The Bluebird was the immortals’ messenger from Fairyland, and is usually
described as an oriole. ‘White gulls’ are commonly mentioned in verses about
Guizhou. Some lines on springtime in the province, for instance, say129
These white gulls do not keep away from the presence of human beings,
But alight, with their wings uplifted, at the mouth of the little stream.
In Chen’s poem the implication is of course ‘these real white gulls’ are more
than a match for the Bluebird of the imagination.
But one was only meant to spend ‘a while’ in the immediately visible
world. He goes on to speak of the religious inspiration of the caves. It is
useful at this point to provide a few explanations in advance. Vimalakı̄rti, a
historical personage who was believed to have undergone the ‘disease of existence’ to help save all sentient beings, was the central figure in one of the
scriptures most inﬂuential in China. He was also famous for using a moment
of silence to express the nature of the Absolute.130 Lanterns were a manyvalued symbol: they often evoked transmission—one ﬂame lighting
another—whether of reincarnation or the communication of spiritual awakening. The phrase ‘each life’ relates to the unceasing cycle of death and
rebirth undergone by the nonenlightened. ‘Single Finger’ meditation was a
technique of inducing insight developed by the Song-dynasty monk Tianlong and his disciple Juzhi: the single uplifted ﬁnger expressed the idea that
all dharmas, or morally correct ways of living, were ultimately identical. The
‘West’ here is India.

260

Particularities

The gate towers by the Jade Void Palace are wreathed with clouds of
all tints.
The small cave below is that of the Heaven which Vimalakı̄rti
administers.
From the voices of bells, and chiming stones, a Buddhist purity issues,
While under the shadows of ﬁrs and pines, the nighttime lanterns are lit.
Hearing the chanting, I wish to conﬁrm each life’s progress toward its
Enlightenment.
As I sink into Single Finger Reﬂection, my face wears a ﬂeeting smile,
The limitless wisdom that comes from the West is — slowly —
interiorized,
As, year after year, by Jasper Brooklet, the fragrant ﬂowers revive.
It is unclear how much of this—the chanting and lanterns, for example—was
‘real’ and how much in the visitor’s mind. Since, in the Buddhist view, all
composite entities were mind-created illusions, perhaps this mattered less
than we might think. Note, however, the gently ironic ‘should be’ at the end of
the next quatrain translated below.
Chen now introduces elements from older Chinese metaphysics and
Daoism. The ‘shapes’ are the hexagrams from the Book of Changes, the patterns
underlying the ﬂux of the universe. The crane, a symbol of long life, was the
mount on which the immortals rode through the skies. Zhuang Zhou’s
butterﬂy is the best-known story in Chinese philosophy: he dreamed he was a
butterﬂy, but, on awakening, wondered if he might not be a butterﬂy dreaming
he was Zhuang Zhou, the real point of the tale being not that it is hard to trust
the truthfulness of one’s senses, but that things are constantly being changed
into one another.
The storeyed towers soar straight up. Clouds and rivers curve like bows.
The Dipper hanging, Orion’s Belt crosswise, shapes beyond count unfold.
I half imagine, on Jasper Brooklet, salvation’s raft downstream ﬂoating.
In the azure sky, a crane comes ﬂying — or should be, I suppose.
The butterﬂy dreamed of by Zhuang Zhou was not illusion, but fact;
And, though one disdains them, compassion is owed to every mayﬂy
and ant.
The committed Buddhist meets as an equal the Emperor’s diplomats,
And how to ﬁnd the Immortals’ Isles none but the guile-free may ask.
Becoming a sage or an immortal requires “totally cleaning away the innumerable causal afﬁnities” that tie us to this world. Those “outsiders who sleep on
the snow and feed on the clouds,” that is, who, like him, endure the hardships

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

261

of travel, are those who “sing in the breezes and enjoy the moon,” in other
words are touched by the beauty of nature. Such people, he implies, become
like “the empty room that receives the light.” The room is a symbol of the
mind, and the light the light of understanding. In other words, they have taken
the ﬁrst modest steps toward enlightenment. Travel was painful, like a
penance. Like a penance, it could lead to exaltation.
In a more vulgar mode, Tian Wen’s “Welcoming the Spring” expresses the
mixture of fascination and condescension aroused in educated Chinese by the
colorful exuberance of Miao festivals.131 Catching the tone of this poem in
translation is difﬁcult. Mockery and excitement are both there, as are moments
of racial and cultural prejudice.
The ruddy brown hump-backed ox to be offered has a coat in decrepit
condition.
The Spring God of Growth sports raven black locks, and is cracking a
lengthy whip.
A thousand men hold a horned dragon aloft whose jaws are exhaling mists.
— A variegated barbarian show, red seals stamped on their springtime
inscriptions.
Stirring music, and martial maneuvers, follow each other in sequence,
Formations assembling, in array, with magniﬁcent technique.
A troupe that look like grandfatherly farmers inaugurates the proceedings,
Shouldering hoes, or driving their calves, showing prowess at plowing and
weeding.
Banners stand high, and ‘bumper harvest’ enormous letters proclaim.
Flat straw rain-hats covering their heads, pants as tattered as tails of quails,
Their backwoods ballads and rice-planting ditties are incomprehensibly
strange,
Delightedly imitating each other, eyes goggling and gobs agape.
Another troupe follows the one before. Each turn is a different act.
Masts in the wind, or formations of cavalry, soar about with inspired élan.
Only fourteen, or ﬁfteen, years of age, the youthful barbarian lads
Have red lead smeared on their foreheads, and embroidered waistcoats and
pants.
They strum many-stringed zithers, twang guitars, or tootle upon the pipes.
In helmets, with armor on their backs, they ﬂourish their spears and pikes,
Some, in the Land of All Sentient Beings, ride on elephants and upon rhinos,
Or else quest for pearls and cowry shells under distant Persian skies.

262

Particularities

Their strong men are sturdy as ramparts, and much like our own county
magistrates,
Their beautiful girls on a par with those held in the harem in our Palace,
But how can their turbulent motions equal our Heavenly Magical Dancers?
And a singsong lass from Chengdu would be sweeter — for charming one
during a banquet.
The most extraordinary ensemble is the one that comes on at the close:
Like birds in the insubstantial air, with bodies weightlessly ﬂoating,
They uplift their rumps and, with tiptoed feet, take their place on each
others’ shoulders,
Where they strive to perfect the ancient sword dance with swirling
banderoles.
Shortly after this
The old village gentlemen chatter their gibberish, like devils with multiple
tails,
The unwed shake bells, and love-caper in moonlight, their minds topsyturvily crazy.
After more description and comments, Tian notes that the barbarians’ musical
theatricals to welcome the spring attracted numerous spectators and that
subordinate government ofﬁcials were given the day off for the occasion.132 He
concludes by observing, not very modestly, that he has written a book, Folkways
of Guizhou, to celebrate the region. The learned ofﬁcial was functioning like
that indispensable adjunct to tourism: the travel-writer. And pushing his wares.

Diseases
There was a downside: microfauna. In particular, malaria was a problem in the
southern half of the province. It was probably mostly one of the less lethal
varieties, in other words not that inﬂicted by Plasmodium falciparum. In spite
of careful collective observations of the environmental conditions under
which it was likely to occur, it is remarkable that no Han Chinese here seems
to have connected it with its vector, the Anopheles mosquito. The link was wellknown by the Bai people in Yunnan and, at least from early Ming times on, by
the Chinese in close touch with them.133 This is what Tian Wen has to say about
it in the Book of Guizhou:134
The aethers of malaria135 are, in general, to be found everywhere south of
Zhenning136 and near the province of Guangxi. Malaria occurs whenever, as

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

263

spring passes into summer, a light fall of rain has just stopped, the setting
sun is sending its rays aslant, with red light and blue shadows spreading
everywhere like a painting, but without a rainbow or sunset clouds, and
aethers like those rising off glutinous millet being cooked in a steamer.
When people encounter these conditions they hurriedly lie face-down on
the ground, or chew betel nut, or else hold a piece of local sugar cane in their
mouths, which gives them some chance of escaping. If this proves unsuccessful, they at once fall ill in a way that resembles two-day periodic fever.
After some time they become jaundiced, and their stomachs grow
distended, a condition for which there may be no help for from one to two
to three years. The root of the ‘yellowﬂower’ is needed to cure it. The
yellowﬂower grows by streams and marshes. It is rather more than a foot in
height, with leaves like those of the water-pepper [Polygonum hydropiper,
‘smartweed’]. It opens a pair of petals. The root can be used to catch ﬁsh,
and also to counter insects [or ‘reptiles’]. The local people have an extensive
knowledge of it.
In all likelihood, malaria has its origin in mountain vapors, these being
the noxious aethers of the mountains and the marshes.
Georges Métailié of the Laboratory of Ethnobotany in Paris identiﬁes the
‘yellowﬂower’ as probably the Euphorbia chrysocoma, which seems to be found
only in Guizhou. Its full name is the ‘water yellowﬂower’.137
Malaria usually has a periodicity that occurs in multiples of twenty-four
hours as the Plasmodium takes its timing from the temperature cycle in the
human body, though this pattern is less clear for the P. falciparum form.
Enlargement of the spleen and liver is common; a jaundiced appearance can
also occur under some circumstances. So the identiﬁcation seems reasonable.
It also appears that the geographical incidence of malaria changed at the
margins with time. The same source continues by referring to an extraordinary practice that was believed to get rid of it, but also in passing records this
sort of change:
In the past, Huohong and Luojia, which come under the jurisdiction of
Zhenning, habitually suffered from malaria. In recent times people have used
ﬁrearms to startle it, and doing so have dispersed it. This practice has subsequently become the norm, and in like fashion the disease has gradually
become unable to cause people distress. It is certain that the aethers of the
Earth change with the changing of the times!
Descriptions of journeys often mention the presence or absence of malaria.
An example is He Jingming’s “On the Road to Anzhuang.”138 During Ming
times Anzhuang was a Guard Area to the southwest of Guiyang.139 He begins:

264

Particularities

Homes everywhere uninhabited, marsh-grass and wormwood spreading,
How long will this desolation last that was caused by war’s disruption?
Going through mountains, I cross the White Stream, where the summits
rise up abruptly,
And the road comes down to the Panjiang River, where malaria is prevalent.
Hang Huai, an ofﬁcial and poet who ﬂourished at the turn of the ﬁfteenth and
sixteenth centuries, seems to have stressed the seasonal nature of safe travel in
his poem on the Panjiang:140
Crossing the ridges and climbing the ranges while ailing from multiple
sicknesses,
As the year ended and spring arrived I no longer planned an itinerary,
Being well aware these malarial waters had caused many travelers
bitterness,
And the only place for journeying now was high in the barren hills.
Tian Wen was more philosophical:141
One sighs at the green on the mountains: now malaria’s poison is coming.
Nonetheless one delights, when the snow melts, in the odor of blossoming
plums.
Du Zheng, in more verses on the Pan River, recorded that travelers carried
prophylactics:142
Boisterous spate on the Pan, on a day in the third month —
One roof-mat fends off malarial rains in our boat from barbarian
country.
The ferry crossing is overgrown, hanging clouds hold us down like
fetters,
And we travelers, betel nut in our sleeves, commiserate with ourselves.
As Tian Wen had indicated, betel nut was thought to ward off the disease, but
it was best if malaria was not present at all. Li Jing143 wrote these lines in
Mongol times on the Pass of Seven Stars:144
Both cliff walls hacked out, as with an ax, soar till they join the sky.
A stream, just brushing and shaking the ﬂowers, surges forth from the vent
of a cave.
I have heard it asserted malaria’s absent — provided the weather is ﬁne,
And that wayfarers making the traverse here have no reason to feel
dismayed.

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

265

Malaria was present in neither Jiaxing nor Zunhua, the focus of the next
chapter. In Guizhou its distribution deﬁned when and where the outsider
could move with safety.

Wild animals in imagination and reality
Wild animals were human beings in another form. Here are three stories that
illustrate this theme, one each about gibbons, tigers, and an elephant. In each
case their ‘humanity’ takes a different form.
A story placed in the Tang dynasty shows that the distinction between
gibbons and human beings in people’s minds was somewhat blurred, and that
gibbons might on occasions also belong to the superfauna.145
In the Yuanhe reign-period [806–20 ce] Cui Shang . . . entered the gorges
and came to Guizhou. The fall ﬂoods had gone down and his boat
proceeded extremely slowly. The stream, caverns, and woodlands along the
banks formed unsurpassed scenery. Shang therefore disembarked and,
leaning on his staff, walked slowly into a remote area. He had not gone in
more than a kilometer or two when he suddenly came upon human habitations. There were stone bridges, bamboo gates, houses built of planking,
and reed-thatched cottages set along a winding stream. They had quite a
distinctive appearance.
Shang therefore made his way forward and found himself welcomed as a
guest by a crowd of more than ten nuns. They had a lovely appearance and
their speech was full of laughter. They were certainly not mere persons from
the mountain valleys. He at once made his way into their dwellings, where
he observed that the courtyards and sheds contained a great deal of sundried fruit; and he also noticed that all the houses were piled full with it. A
moment later a lot more arrived in clusters from outside, carried in on the
people’s shoulders.
Shang remarked to himself that these remote mountains and lonely
valleys were not places where one could reside permanently, and suspected
the people were uncanny apparitions. He therefore abruptly reversed direction to return. The crowd of nuns held him back and spoke many words of
entreaty. After Shang had reboarded his boat, he asked the boatmen about
this experience. They answered:
“They were only gibbons and monkeys. People have met them in different
places at different times. Because of your enlightened understanding, you

266

Particularities

left rapidly. If you had not done so, it is likely that you would have been
destroyed by them.”
Shang at once assembled his menservants; and, grasping their weapons,
they went to search them out and seize them. But all trace of the nun–
gibbons had vanished.
The appearance of the Buddhist nun, with her shaven head and brownish
habit, may have prompted a visual identiﬁcation with gibbons and monkeys.
This story also refers to a period when Buddhism was becoming somewhat
unpopular with at least a part of ofﬁcialdom. The most important act of imperial repression and limitation of the religion was to occur a couple of decades
later in 842–5 ce. So the possibility must be borne in mind that this tale may
harbor an aspect of anti-Buddhism.
The story about tigers is set in Feizhou,146 in the northeast of Guizhou
province, and also in the Tang dynasty.147
All the families of the barbarians in Feizhou have the surname ‘Fei’. The area
in which the clan lives suffers numerous assaults by tigers. It is the custom
for everyone to live in houses with upper storeys so as to escape them.
Some time in the Kaiyuan reign-period [713–41 ce] Di Guangsi was the
prefect here, and his grandson Bowang was born in the ofﬁcial residence.
The husband of Bowang’s wet-nurse was Fei Zhong, a strong and courageous man who was skilled at shooting. On one occasion he was returning
home from the prefectural capital, carrying rice on his shoulders. The road
through the mountains was obstructed, and before he was aware of it, the
sun was setting. More than ﬁfteen kilometers of his journey remained ahead
of him.
Zhong feared that he would not escape unharmed, so he took his sword
blade in hand and cut several bundles of ﬁrewood. He obtained ﬁre by
striking stones together, and set the wood alight in order to protect himself.
Before long he heard the voices of tigers setting the woods and the undergrowth shaking. He put his turban as a hat on top of the sack of rice, girdled
the sack with his belt, and left it standing in the light of the ﬁre. He then
pulled himself up into a large tree.
A moment later four tigers arrived together, and noticed the sack of rice.
The largest among them advanced and seized hold of it, but when they had
realized that it was not a human being they looked at each other in silence.
The second largest tiger led the two cubs away, and the largest tiger
remained alone beside the ﬁre.
Then, all at once, he took off his skin. He was an old man! After that he
crooked his arm to serve as a pillow, and went to sleep. Zhong had always

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

267

been endowed with strength and swift reactions, so he regarded him as easy
enough to deal with. Slowly he descended the tree, grabbed him by the
throat, and directed his sword at his neck. The old man begged for his life,
so Zhong bound his hands together and questioned him.
“I am Old Fei from North Village,” came the reply. “I have been punished
by becoming a tiger. The underworld ofﬁcials have a schedule commanding
me to eat people. This evening I should have eaten Fei Zhong, and was
therefore waiting for him to come along. In fact I met up with this sack of
rice, which made me most disappointed and depressed, but I thought that
if I remained here, he would be certain to come back. To my surprise, I have
been taken hold of by you, sir. If you do not believe me, you can look at the
schedule on my belt, after which you will understand.”
Once Zhong had looked at the schedule, he asked how he could save
himself.
“If there is someone who has the same surname and personal name as
you have,” came the answer, “he can substitute for you. If, at some later time,
the matter comes to light, I will be punished but the punishment will only
amount to going hungry for ten days.”
“There’s a Fei Zhong in South Village at present,” said Fei Zhong. “Could
he substitute for me, or not?”
The old man agreed that he could. Zhong then ﬁrst took the skin and
put it at the top of the tree. After this he came down again and unbound
the old man.
“I am under constraint,” said the old man. “My body is up in the tree, but
once I re-enter that skin then I will no longer recognize you. If, when you
hear me roar, you fall down onto the ground, you will assuredly be eaten.
The pattern-principles that govern phenomena are of this nature. It will not
be a breach of our agreement on my part.”
Zhong bade him farewell, climbed the tree, and threw the skin down to
him. When he had the skin, the old man entered it from the hind paws.
Once he had resumed his previous form, he gave several dozen mighty
roars, then departed.
Zhong was able to return home, but several days later, as Fei Zhong of
South Village was hoeing his land, he was indeed devoured.
Folktales from many cultures are based on a belief that some animals are human
beings under enchantment, and can for a time assume their human shape again
by removing their skins, and be prevented from becoming animals once more if
the skin is withheld from them. This old and widespread idea has been interwoven here with Chinese conceptions of a supernatural bureaucracy that disciplines the dead in accordance with a penal code and a tariff of penalties and, in

268

Particularities

this case, a schedule for homicides. It seems likely that the Chinese sense of the
ambiguous nature of such animals, that they are both like and unlike human
beings, may have diminished in late-imperial times.
Elephants were different. Tian Wen’s Book of Guizhou tells the following
story:148
In 1625, under the Ming dynasty, once the rebels An Bangyan from Shuixi
and She Chongming from Lanzhou had . . . raised troops to attack Yunnan,
. . . few had the willpower to struggle with them.
Martial law was proclaimed in the province of Guizhou, and the forces of
local chieftain Tao were transferred to Malong to exterminate them. An
elephant was lying here deeply submerged in a little ditch. He sucked a
hundred to a hundred-and-ﬁfty liters of its muddy water into his trunk and,
when the ‘bandits’ were least expecting it, rushed out trumpeting, leaping
several tens of feet at a time, and squirting out the muddy water from his
trunk. This created a cloudy fog and directly blocked the enemy’s front line.
Men and horses dashed off in all directions, or turned in circles, beset by
panic. The ‘bandits’ leapt and fell about, or else pawed the ground like deer.
Once the ‘bandits’ had been scattered in this fashion, the local chieftain’s
forces took advantage of the opportunity to chase them off to the north. A
total victory was secured.
As evening was falling and the commander was calling his soldiers back,
the elephant was still bubbling over with more than enough courage to
spare, but his trunk had been smitten by poisoned arrows. The day
following he was critically ill, and they pressed on his body to extract the
residues of three arrowheads. Not long after this he died.
The people of Yunnan and Guizhou made him a burial mound in gratitude, and erected a stone memorial tablet on the south-facing slope of the
Southern Mountain. I contributed the words of a commemorative inscription for them:
“Here is only the image of an elephant, such as one may ﬁnd in the Scripture of the Changes. His eyes were tiny, his form immense. His trunk was
long, his tushes huge, his ﬂesh that of all the beasts combined together.
His courage followed the course of the seasons. He was born in the
wilderness, and reared in workyards and markets. Moving, he was like a
cloud going by. Standing still, he resembled an uplifted peak. He was like
the Bed of Seven Jewels owned by the Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty,
spread with a coverlet embroidered in ﬁvefold patterning. He possessed a
most intelligent nature, having besides a considerable understanding of
ﬁdelity and public-spirited service. . . .

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

269

“With your unyielding stare and refusal to capitulate, in what way were
you inferior to heroes and men of high worth? Whether we were to be in
peace or in peril hung upon this one battle. While all others stood by
doing nothing, you alone ‘bared your arms for combat’. The robbers were
bereft of their souls; they spat out their vital force. . . . Your blood has
been transformed into a ﬂitting ghost-ﬁre. Your bones, interred, have
become jade. The remnants of your ardent bravery are still alive. The
grasses grow verdant, and golden are the clouds. The sinuous dragons
that support the sides of this stele have the curved shape of a dangling
elephant’s trunk.”
This story was an addition to the Chinese myths and legends that celebrated
righteous animals—the dog rolling himself in water and wetting his sleeping
master to save him from ﬁre, the horse kneeling at the side of a ravine into
which his rider had fallen and letting his reins hang down to serve the latter as
a means of escape, and many others. Unlike these tales, the core events
recounted by Tian were probably true.
The assertion of the moral worth of a member of another species has to be
understood within the context of values determined by the human hierarchy,
not in, of, and for itself. The imagined geospiritual absorption of the departed
elephant hero into the landscape, where he remained in some sense still
present, was also true for his virtuous human counterparts. Beyond this, we
may note that he was a tamed elephant, broken in to useful work, and at times
richly caparisoned. A member of human society.
Descriptions of reactions to most real wild animals were also based on the
sense that it was human nature to interact with them emotionally, and at times
physically, as beings that were half alien but also half kin. Thus Chang'an could
write:149
Hearing gibbons cry, and tigers scream, makes one’s inner mood depressed.
Under bright stars and the chilly moon one hastens with fearful steps.
But more cheerful companionship was also possible. Jiang Yingke, an ofﬁcial
who ﬂourished in the late sixteenth century, wrote about the Temple at
Huayan Grotto that150
Birds observe the monks by the stoves, engaged in steaming their rice.
Beside the gate to the cave, gibbons swing by their arms from the pines.
A fear of tigers, however, was never far from the back of people’s minds.
Shadows, falling across the gorge, gave the rocks a thousand strange forms
That became transﬁgured in autumn light into patterns of textures and
stippling.

270

Particularities

Once we learnt that tigers were passing through, having chanced to hear
people talk,
Color drained from our faces. Advancing further was placed under
prohibition.
Thus Ge Yilong in his poem “Among the Mountains of Pingyue.”151 Even the
smell of the animals made people uneasy. An ofﬁcial in the second half of the
ﬁfteenth century wrote in “The Road to Anzhuang”:152
Day’s curtain has closed. The colors have darkened. People head home
from their shopping.
A frowsy stench gusts from mid-ravine: on the bridge, a tiger has crossed.
The night-alarm’s beaten. The moon’s not yet bright, so we tarry a little
longer,
The whole sky still cerulean blue, and nighttime some hours off.
A ballad by Lu Can in the sixteenth century on the sufferings of the soldiers
and the army porters in the frontier areas of the province contains the lines:153
Feel compassion! This is the season of snows, and frosts, and tempests.
They are famished. They are frozen. Feeble, but driven forward by the
unrelenting pressure.
Their hands clutch for wheat-ear scrapings, to sieve in the streams for
dinner,
Scalps and faces are grimed with grease, where the lice and the leeches are
clinging,
In these lofty peaks and massive ranges, where slopes turn round countless
bends.
Shoulders protrude through tattered clothes. Their legs have lost their
strength.
Every three strides they glance behind. Every ﬁve they sink in gloom.
For the bamboo thickets and deep-set woods are ﬁlled with tigers’ spoor.
Many Guizhou travel poems, dull enough to be convincing, also mention the
author’s apprehension that he may meet a tiger.154 Humans could also be hunted.

Exaltation, terror, and depression
The landscape of Guizhou and the Southwest induced contrasting moods.
One of the most striking was a kind of mystical exaltation. An evocative
example is a poem by Zhang Pengchong, an ofﬁcial, traveler, poet, and painter
who ﬂourished in the ﬁrst half of the eighteenth century.155 The subject of his

Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao

271

verses is the waterfall at Water Pavilion. It should be explained in advance that
the Chinese believed that rainbows drank from streams, and that the ‘Pearl of
Illumination’ refers to Buddhist doctrine, sometimes symbolized by a mythical
pearl known as ‘Mani’ that was believed to shine in the darkness.
On the high track through the desolate peaks, I reached the last vestige of
green,
Hearing at times the noise of rushing that spoke from the narrowing
streams.
Extending across an age-old torrent was a bridge that I chanced on, startled.
The meanders on the upriver side were so sleek they seemed spread with
carpets,
But downstream the current plummeted, to the Ping, sheer a thousand
feet,
Through a cleft. Then suspended in empty space, it fell in a single leap.
Its mistiness seemed like the oscillations of uncountable sheets of gold foil,
As the air currents kept them aloft, alternately sinking and soaring.
In an instant’s simple astonishment they had been transformed to haze,
Blown about like unsteady snowﬂakes that drift down on a cloudless day.
Above us a rainbow, drunk to perfection, was made what it was by the
light.
Of scant worth is the Pearl of Illumination when the sun shines forth in the sky.
Overlapping, and breaking, then joining once more, the patterns of
shadows were multiple,
While the cliffs crashed down and boulders split, with a roaring that
rumbled like thunder.
My spirit teetered. My eyes were blurred, my heart–mind and soul topsyturvy.
I have heard that, of old, wild rhinoceros — lay hid in that whirlpool’s
swirling.
Zhang ends by telling us that he recited “in a clear voice” two chapters from the
Master Zhuang, the Daoist scripture, namely “Transcendental Roaming” and
“Autumn Floods.” Both of these touch on the relativity of size, and the place of
human beings in a universe vaster than they can imagine. He ends by stating,
“No doubt my body will become an immortal who wings through the void.”
At the heart of the poem is the assertion that it is the real world—“when the
sun shines forth in the sky”—that takes one to this state, not the Buddhist
doctrine of unreality underlying all phenomena.

272

Particularities

The capacity of the landscape also to inspire fear is the leitmotif of some
verses on the rapids of Wuman by Tian Rucheng.156 These rapids are in Guangxi,
well south of the Guizhou border, though described in the Guizhou gazetteer.157
The river they are on is one of the main tributaries of the West River, and they
are famous for dangerous rocks that have been given individual names such as
‘The Three Demons’, ‘The Horse Trough’, ‘Thunderclap’, and so on.
Like a single leaf we are ﬂoating downstream, in the midst of the ﬂowing
waters.
A thousand peaks are opening out, on either side of the rapids.
The aquatic lizards are blowing the waves till they eddy around in vortices,
In repeating circles, the swallows soar, using the wind to carry them.
From the river, the giant rocks emerge, in order to welcome our boat.
We travelers listen as, close by, swells the mournful dirge of the gibbons.
I have never before been burdened by terror when facing dangerous
moments,
But, having once ventured on this course, helter-skelter my heartbeat’s
rhythm.
The life of the place is expressed not only by the reptiles, primates, and birds,
but also the threatening rocks that seem alive. Fear of this sort can inspire an
irresistible excitement, an intensity of existence that comes from the sense of a
more direct contact with reality.
But the shadow from history cast by colonial dispossession could never be
wholly exorcised. Li Rui’s poem “On the Road to Parrot Brook” reminds the
reader of the revenge taken from time to time by the ‘bandits’, or freedomﬁghters, who were the Miao, and how the life force of trees, dogs, waters, and
birds contrasts with human criminality: 158
Beneath the full moon, here and there, some ruined walls remain,
And the stone gate, under the shadows of the dark green of the willows.
The inhabitants deserted this place before the bandits raided,
But the dogs, though their masters have left, know they must defend the
village.
Along the channel the water is ﬂowing, and brimming over the spillway.
At the edge of the trees, the orioles chirrup, till daylight has turned to dusk.
What causes of war made this pastured land become the scene of killings?
It has caused me to sob, repeatedly. And my throat has choked on my
supper.
A depression that haunted a land of spectacular beauty.

9
The Riddle of Longevity:
Why Zunhua?
People lived longer in the late-imperial department of Zunhua in the mountains along the old Ming northern frontier (on the border between the Northeast and Manchuria). The expectation of life at birth for a woman was in the
high forties, twice as long as in Jiaxing.1 Ferreting out possible reasons for these
differences is the most important question underlying this chapter on an area
that came by Qing times to ﬂourish even though its development was limited
by environmental restraints.
Was Zunhua somehow healthier? If so, why?
Let us begin with a negative. The latest local gazetteer from imperial times,
published in 1886, has no record of epidemics of infectious disease, though
there was a temple to the God of Medicine, and traditional rituals to prevent
sickness. This was in marked contrast with the coastal province in which
Jiaxing was located, namely Zhejiang. In Zhejiang people were gripped by a
fear of epidemics, and the epidemics were real.2 Zunhua’s situation was also
different from that of Guizhou in the Southwest, which, as we have seen,
suffered from malaria south of the Southern Ridge line, and about which
visitors wrote so bitterly.
Epidemics, of course, there were. This appears from a list of the causes of
untimely death afﬂicting local people. The catalog is part of an imperial order
to the local City God, instructing him to be sure, in the local other world over
which he presided, to see to the sacriﬁces for the unhappy souls who had lost
their lives in one of these ways, or who were without living descendants, and
probably not receiving ritual offerings.3
Some will have suffered, without justiﬁcation, under the swords of the
soldiery. Some will have perished at the hands of bandits, either on the

274

Particularities

water or the land. Some will have expired from rage when others forcibly
seized their wives and concubines. Some will have been compelled to die by
those robbing them of their goods. Others will have been unjustly executed
as ofﬁcial punishment. Some will have succumbed to epidemics when natural
disasters were spreading abroad. Others will have been killed by ﬁerce tigers
or venomous snakes; others again by the combined pressure of starvation
and cold. Some will have lost their lives in battles or affrays; others have
strangled themselves because of anxiety in crises. Some will have been
crushed to death when their walls or houses crashed down in ruins upon
them. . . . Lonely souls of this sort have no one to depend on in death. Their
spirits do not dissolve but congeal into dark shades that attach themselves
to plants or trees, or else become ghosts that cry out in anguished voices
beneath the moon and stars, and moan through the winds and rains.
These anguished dead were part of the local population, and good government
required they be comforted. Epidemics are not treated here as anything more
general and terrible than a misfortune that could kill an individual.
This apparent comparative freedom from epidemic disease and other infection may have been related to a relatively low density of population. The ﬁrst
approximately reliable ﬁgures for the department are for 1820 and give 702,316
persons, with a household size of 6.4. By 1910, there were 899,354 persons with a
household size down to 5.4.4 It is, however, hard to calculate a meaningful value
for density in hilly terrain where only a small part of the surface is habitable.
It may also have been in part due to winters whose temperature fell below
freezing, so reducing the activities of at least some potential micro-organisms
and their carriers. (Only a few insects, for example, are active at zero temperatures, or below.) The persistence of the cold throughout much of the year is
evident in some local doggerel.5 The dates refer to the months and days of the
old lunar calendar, which begins in most years in February:
On the ninth of the ﬁrst, and the ninth of the second,
Our feet are frozen, our ﬁngers gelid.
On the ninth of the third, and the ninth of the fourth,
The cold is deadly for dogs and boars.
On the ninth of the ﬁfth, and the ninth of the sixth,
We walk by the rivers to view the willows.
On the ninth of the seventh the streams are in spate.
Wild geese arrive on the ninth of the eighth.
On the ninth of the ninth there’s no ice left to thaw,
To the ninth of the ninth we add one nine more:
Oxen everywhere tilling the soil.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

275

Zunhua was cold until well into May.
The quality of the department’s water was high. This could have helped limit
stomach and intestinal ailments. The mountain environment caused rivers to
ﬂow swiftly, and the rapid currents and sandy and gravelly surfaces could have
contributed to the microbial ﬁltering and to cleansing the water. (Passage
through sand will, for example, remove most Giardia.) The Chinese in this
period everywhere routinely boiled water for drinking and making tea, but
probably not for long enough to be completely secure, if modern experience
can be taken as a guide. Initial quality could still therefore have been important.
Zunhua people knew water could transmit sickness. Hence their custom, in
the small hours of the morning before each New Year’s Day, of tossing red
lentils into their wells, persuaded that, if they did so, “during the entire year,
those who drink the water will not catch infections.”6
Turning now to the postive factors, it is clear that their diet was unusually
high in meat and fruit by late-imperial Chinese standards. The economy was
based on a mixture of modes providing an exceptionally varied combination.
Dry-land arable farming was the foundation. The basic crops were millets and
wheats. The ﬁelds were backed up by vegetable gardens, but the people of
Zunhua were also skilled at silviculture, the art of cultivating trees. The additional foods that these provided, apart from the products like construction
timber, ﬁrewood, oils, and wax, were an environmental buffer against hard times.
There was still some hunting, ranging from bears, whose paws were a
gourmet’s delicacies, to foxes, who were disdained as almost not worth bothering with. Stock raising was extensive. There were large numbers of sheep and
goats in addition to cattle, and also donkeys, who were sometimes eaten as
meat or made into soup. Pigs were nourished on scraps. A little sheep’s milk
was also drunk, an unusual practice for late-imperial China Proper.
Zunhua had been famous since antiquity for its fruit trees, including
peaches and plums, each of which had an immense number of varieties. In
later times its apples were celebrated, and exported out of the department,
carefully wrapped in leaves. In the seventh lunar moon, “when the fruits in the
gardens have all been plucked, this is known as the ‘fruit harvest’,” in explicit
parallel with the “millet harvest.” 7 Fruits were a distinctive part of local
culture. On the eighth day of the last month of the year, for instance, it was
customary to mix beans and fruits with rice, and cook them into a porridge.
This was smeared onto the fruit trees, in the belief that it would cause them to
have plentiful yields.8
The relationship of diet to health is well established as a general principle
but the details are complicated and often problematic.9 Diet has played a major
and too-little-recognized part in history, as the work of Mark Cohen has

276

Particularities

shown for ancient times and that of Alan Macfarlane for England in the eighteenth century.10 All we can do here is to speculate that this varied diet may
have helped provide a more than usually reliable supply of animal proteins,
and of necessary minerals and vitamins. This could have been especially true
of vitamins B12 and D, which are respectively virtually impossible and difﬁcult
to obtain from a vegetarian diet. If so, this would have strengthened basic
resistance to disease.
Looking at the problem from a different point of view, there are indications
that seasonal rhythms of work provided a sustained period of relative rest
during the winter, in contrast to the round-the-year activity of the center and
south of China. People may have beneﬁted from the chance to recuperate
from overwork.
Abundant timber was available for fuel and for buildings, though the supply
has diminished during the present century. Very few people would have had to
be cold indoors during the winter. Thus:11
Those mountain trees near the frontier that have not been converted into the
property of village domains are, if of small size, gathered for ﬁrewood. Those
of larger size are smoldered under a covering to form charcoal, and transported to other areas. The price is cheap, the quality solid. Those who peddle
it gather north of the departmental capital by the bend in the large river.
A fuel surplus in late-traditional times!
Finally, the women were not subject to the same degree of stress that
burdened them in the lower Yangzi region, where they had both to manage a
household and children, on the one hand, and work at handicrafts and
farming, on the other. This could also have made some contribution to better
cared-for children and to female longevity.
These suggestions are grouped together here to provide a preliminary
overview. They are illustrated, developed, and qualiﬁed in what follows. It
needs to be stressed that, while the problem of longevity is a real one, the
answers suggested are speculative. At this stage they need to be argued about
rather than believed. But the general point holds: the nature of the environment is one of the crucial determinants of rates of human survival.

Landscape and geography
Zunhua is located in the mountains of the Northeast of China Proper.12 In
ancient times it was part of the domain of the Wuzhong, ‘mountain barbarians’, who later founded the state of Wuzhongzi. In the seventh century bce it

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

277

was subdued by Duke Huan of Qi, the Chinese state that then lay to its south;
and he in turn handed it over to the state of Yan.
The Wuzhong were part of a complex of tribes that included the later Xianbi
and the Qidan, both of whom ruled parts of China at times. Though once
spread over a much larger area than just Zunhua, the Wuzhong disappeared
from history quite soon. All that survived was their name in the names of
various counties for more than a thousand years.13 In the preimperial period
the area was almost a purely forest economy, famous for having no ﬁelds but
a wealth of Chinese date trees and chestnuts. Historical sources give us occasional glimpses of what life may have been like in the early-imperial age. For
example, around the end of the second century ce, when the Later Han was
collapsing in disorder, Tian Chou, who came from Wuzhong, led his kinsmen
and followers “into the Xuwu Mountains, where he encamped on a plateau
amid the depths of the deﬁles, living there for a number of years. The common
people rallied to him, reaching more than ﬁve thousand families.”14 This
suggests that relatively inaccessible but habitable land was abundant in Yutian,
one of Zunhua’s three constituent counties, at this time. This was probably
because the Wuzhong, and the Xiongnu barbarians with whom they had
become mixed after the latter’s defeat by Emperor Wu of the Han, had still not
to any great extent adopted farming.15
The general view of educated people in late-imperial times of Zunhua’s
remoter past was that it was primitive and all but unknowable. Here is part of
an inscription composed in late-imperial times by a certain Shi Pu, of whom we
only know that he came from the area, to commemorate one of the many
rebuildings of the walls of the departmental capital. The ‘Springs and Autumns’
(see Table 1) refers to the second quarter of the ﬁrst millennium bce.16
During the Springs and Autumns period Zunhua was the state of
Wuzhongzi. In its origins it was an out-of-the-way location, secluded in the
mountains, and utterly primeval. I have not heard that there were any [largescale] building operations. Even if there were, this state left no historical
records. . . .
There is documentary evidence for the great walls that ran along the
northern border of the commandery for sixty or so kilometers. That built
by the state of Yan ran from Zaoyang to Xiangping; that built by the Qin
dynasty from Lintao to Liaodong. Both of these passed through the territory
of this department. Large-scale building ﬁrst appears in the histories during
the Han and Jin dynasties.17 For the ﬁrst time, a division was made between
the two counties of Wuzhong and Junmi,18 but they were later again
combined into one, as Wuzhong. If we use the [distances in the] present-day
jurisdiction to determine how far this other ancient county was from the

278

Particularities

county capital at Wuzhong,19 it was not more than ﬁfty kilometers distant in
all. This implies that it was merely a mean little frontier village. Those who
dwelt there probably passed their entire lives without knowing what inner
and outer city walls look like. If some of them did know, how could it have
been more than a distant vision of lofty walls and towering observationpavilions?
In the Wude reign-period of the Tang [618–26], an Imperial Horse-Buying
Agency was set up within the jurisdiction falling under the present department. The old gazetteers say that in Tang times the city walls were made of
rammed earth. Might this have been done at the time they set up the
Agency? . . .
During the several hundred years [before the Ming, when the area was not
under Chinese control], those who governed the people here were so habituated to their simple rustic ways that they did not venture to propose the
undertaking [of rebuilding the crumbled walls]. I have learned from elderly
people that the ﬁrst system of [these later] walls was exceedingly constricted.
What is today the Wenming River used then to be the city moat on the
western side, and the present drum-tower was anciently the stoppingpoint outside the north gate. Its circumference did not amount to half of
that of the present system of walls.
The ‘ﬁrst’ system of walls spoken of here is actually likely to have been that of
the Ming, but there is controversy about this. Let us look at the alternating
periods of Chinese and non-Chinese rule in more detail.
During the period of political fragmentation from the third to the sixth
centuries ce, Zunhua was on the edge of the small state of the Former Yan, and
several of its successors, which also bore the name ‘Yan’ in some form, and then
of the Xianbi empire created by the Toba Wei. This age saw the spread of a more
settled and more agricultural way of life among non-Chinese in the Northeast.
This must have been partly prompted by the ﬂood of Chinese migrants into
Former Yan, ﬂeeing the disorders on the north China plain. Murong Guang, who
came to the throne of Former Yan in 314, and died in 348, is reported as having
abolished his hunting enclosures and grazing-parks to provide farmland and
gifts of cattle for the poverty-stricken newcomers.20 This inﬂux of Chinese
farmers must also have led to further ethnic mixing.21 Nonetheless, it is obvious
from the references in the histories to the seizures of gigantic quantities of livestock by the victors in the perpetual wars of this age—horses, cattle, and sheep—
that the pastoral economy remained important.22 A little later, Feng Ba, the
founder of the Northern Yan in 409, and a promoter of farming, ordered that
those farmers who slacked at it should be put to death.23 This ferocity suggests
an archaic level of difﬁculty in having the new mode of production accepted.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

279

The climate was unusually cold in this age. There is a story about Murong
Xi, one of the rulers of Later Yan, that touches on this. Xi’s empress was
besotted by hunting. On one occasion he followed her to White Deer Mountain, which is about 42° N, well north of Zunhua, and then east to a point now
close to the Korean border. On the way, ﬁve thousand of his soldiers are said
either to have been killed by tigers and wolves, or to have been frozen to death
by the cold.24 Agriculture up here would have become easier in the warmer
climate that set in toward the end of the sixth century.
As we have noted, the shadowy Wuzhong, the original inhabitants of
Zunhua, were related to the Xianbi, and there are hints in our sources as to
the kind of life the latter led. In 415 ce, there was a famine in what was then
the Xianbi heartland and is today northern Shanxi province. The statesman
Cui Hao, for all that he was profoundly versed in Chinese philosophical
culture, urged the ruler of the Toba Wei, a Xianbi dynasty, on no account to
shift the capital south. He held out a traditional vision to the still undecided
monarch: “When spring comes, the grass will grow, and milk curds be
produced. If these are combined with vegetables and fruits, that will see us
through to the fall. If we then have a middling harvest, the matter will be
done with.”25 This sounds not unlike the mixed economy on which Zunhua
throve in later times: a combination of herding, gathering, gardening,
orchards, and agriculture. More than seventy years after Cui Hao’s plea,
however, in 487, a shortage of food and “no green grass on the plains,” ﬁnally
forced the Toba to move south to the ancient Chinese capital of Luoyang. The
decisive reason was the need to be within reach of cheap transport for
supplies. On this occasion, the harshness and variability of the weather
dictated the destinies of history.
We can glimpse early Qidan ways of life around the middle of the ﬁrst millennium ce from the description of the Qi people, a branch of the Qidan, in the
History of the Sui Dynasty:26
Some follow water and grazing as they care for their herds. They live in felt
huts, and place their wagons in a circle to make a camp. . . . Others are scattered throughout the mountain valleys, have no taxes to pay, and hunt with
their bows for their wealth. For the most part, they cultivate a coarse millet
which, once they have gathered it, they store in cellars under the mountains.
They cut wood to make mortars, and use earthenware three-legged pots for
their thick and thin gruel, which they eat after mixing cold water with the
pulverized grain.
Their early diet in fact seems to have been mostly meat and milk, with dung
being burned as fuel.27 Some elements of this Qidan economic technology

280

Particularities

seem to have passed directly into Zunhua’s heritage, an example being this use
of cellars for storing food over the winter.
Some Xianbi songs have been preserved in Chinese versions. Even in what
may be a second translation, or else a rendering of Xianbi-style Chinese, they
still evoke something of the environment in which these herdsmen and
horsemen lived.28 They mostly refer, however, to the steppe-like lands north of
the forested Zunhua, and should be taken only as the roughest of indications,
since we lack other sources. Related cultures, but different environments. Thus:
The sky is a round-topped tent of felt,
A lid on the plain from east to west.
The sky is azure, deep and rich,
The plain a vastness, where nothing’s distinct.
Then, as the grasses bend down in the wind,
Suddenly sheep and cows are visible.
The excitement of seeing the animals on whom life depended.
What it meant, psychologically, to be a northern ‘barbarian’ can be glimpsed
from other songs. They have at times a bleakness of heart, a directness about
the imminence of death, and a celebration of physical sexuality that are unChinese. Here is a traveler away from home:29
From the head of the slope, the water ﬂows,
And, ﬂowing away, leaves the hill behind.
I think of myself here, on my own,
Like a changeable wind in the empty wilds.
I start out at dawn with a heart that’s light,
And evenings I lodge at the top of the slope.
The cold is beyond any words to describe.
My tongue curls up inside my throat.
From the head of the slope, the water ﬂows,
But the song of my voice, deep down, is choked.
So remote Qin River, once my home,
That my will to go on is forever broken.30
The second song is about masculinity, the frightened feelings behind the mask
of courage, and the transience of the warrior’s glory:
A man must not waver in what he desires,
Nor give pledges of friendship to many companions.
The bird of prey wings on his way through the sky.
Uncertainty reigns in a rabble of sparrows.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

281

He lets loose his horse on the wide, watered, meadow.
His horse swells his stomach on ﬁne-tasting grazing.
Plates of iron serve as bucklers across back and breast,
His sword curves like the plume on a hill-pheasant’s tail.
The ranks standing in front eye those standing behind,
Then iron breastplates align in covered-off ranks.
Heads in the front glance along the rear line,
Then the points of iron blades become squared off exactly.
A man’s but a crawling beast, ﬁt for compassion.
He goes forth from his door, sick with anguish he’ll perish.
His corpse lies there killed, in the narrow hill valley,
With none to pick up his bleached relics of skeleton.
One stanza will do to illustrate barbarian style in singing about making love.
After four verses of amatory double-entendres on the subject of riding horses,
such as whipping and saddling, a song concludes as follows:
A vigorous lad needs a frolicsome mount
As a frolicsome mount needs a vigorous lad.
Once hoofed under the dust, and heel-stamped down —
No more ‘mares-and-stallions’ after that!
The age-old message: Death is coming. Get on with it!
Life is almost always deﬁned in terms of animals: the superiority of the
determined raptor to the muddleheaded sparrows; the splendor of the young
warrior on his well-fed steed, off to die; the image of the boundless vitality of
love-making horses—propaganda for the sexual act.
During the later Chinese Middle Ages Zunhua was a zone in which the
northern ‘barbarians’ clashed repeatedly with the Chinese. Su Che expressed a
standard view of ‘Yan’, the ancient general name for this region, when he wrote
in Song times that31
The hills, in the ranges of Yan, wind like a serpent extending
Over hundreds of leagues, to keep Chinese apart from barbarians.
The customs of the people, he noted, were different from those elsewhere in
China. “From long ago they have been accustomed to both farming and
ﬁghting.” And he added:
At the present, half, already, have it seems acquired the habits
— Heirs though they be to the Han and Tang, of — sad to say it — savages.

282

Particularities

Why so? The area had passed into Qidan hands in 937, as part of a block of
sixteen northeastern prefectures ceded by the Later Jin dynasty. It later came
under the Jürchen in the twelfth century and the Mongols in the thirteenth,
not reverting to Chinese sovereignty until the start of the Ming, four hundred
years after it had ﬁrst been surrendered.32 Many Chinese had, however, ﬂed of
their own free will to the Qidan during the troubles at the end of the Tang, and
just afterward, taking with them important technical skills, including ironworking. Since we do not have speciﬁc materials for Zunhua during the second
half of the ﬁrst millennium ce and the early second millenium, it is useful, to
form some idea of the last, to look once again at more general accounts of
Qidan life at this time, provided it is remembered that, as before, they mostly
refer to areas north of Zunhua, and with a drier climate.
Those who were captured in war, or became part of subjugated populations
after a military defeat, were treated as slaves. On occasion they might even be
tied with cords to trees to stop them running away, but a better means of
reducing the frequency of escapes was found to be furnishing them with
wives.33 Su Che, when on his mission to the Qidan, made the interesting observation about the Chinese laborers he found there obliged to toil at farming
that “little by little their clothing changes, but they still keep their language.”34
Eventually, though, one suspects, even such slaves became assimilated.
When Su Song likewise went north on a mission he commented on the
ﬂocks of sheep “numbered in hundreds and thousands.” He noted that the
animals were allowed to ﬁnd their own way to grass and water in the summer
months, and not conﬁned, “yet they multiply most abundantly.” The Chinese
style in animal management tended to favor tighter control—hence the
slightly grudging ‘yet’. He observed that the same held for horses. The Qidan
neither trimmed their hooves nor clipped their manes. “They say that if horses
can follow their own nature, they will multiply in greater numbers.”35 He was
unhappy, however, to learn that the tenants he witnessed toiling at farming, all
Chinese, were heavily burdened with exactions.36
High and low, the balked ﬁelds spread away, like the lines on a board for
chess.37
Counted in valleys-full, horses, and cattle, crisscross in every direction.
With hundreds of taxes and corvées, there are few days off for leisure.
It calls for pity that people’s lives should be so constantly vexed.
The term ‘balked’ is used for a Chinese term that means the end of or the
boundary of a ﬁeld, but what Su Song was seeing was probably ridges. This is
explained in another account of the Qidan world from the eleventh century.38
The key phrase is italicized:39

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

283

Once one has gone out through the Old North Pass one is in barbarian territory. The inhabitants here have straw huts or houses made of planking. They
still engage in farming, but lack mulberry trees and silk-thorns [whose
leaves were also eaten by silkworms]. Everything they plant is on ridges,
because of their worry that the blowing sand will block their growth. Tall
pines adorn the mountains, and many pursue the trade of charcoal-burning
in the deep valleys. From time to time one sees animals being reared: cattle,
horses, and camels, with black sheep and brown pigs being especially
numerous.
The Chinese commentator’s awe at the abundance of livestock comes through
here, as in many accounts. When on one occasion the Qidan defeated the
Jürchen, they are said to have appropriated over two hundred thousand
horses.40 Even discounting for historian’s hyperbole, this must have been a
staggering number. When, somewhat earlier, Liu Rengong had ruled in
Youzhou at the end of the Tang dynasty he had used environmental warfare
against the Qidan animals. Each year, as the frosts began to fall, he would have
all the grass in their lands burned. This caused so many of their horses to
perish from starvation that they had to bribe him to stop it. In part with a gift
of horses.41
The glossary appended to the History of the Liao Dynasty expresses an
appreciation of the intimate knowledge that Qidan hunters had of the habits
and dispositions of wild animals.42 In particular, “it is the nature of deer to
hanker after salt, so they lure them by sprinkling salt on the ground, then shoot
them.” Hunters might also blow on a horn at night in such a way as to imitate
the cry of a deer, and when the deer had gathered, dispatch them in the same
manner.
A mix of farming, a little hunting, and a lot of stock raising, and tree cultivation can be glimpsed from the text of a stele composed under the QidanLiao dynasty that describes the restoration of the Buddhist Golden Cockerel
Sighting Temple and its estate. Besides having to reopen the temple pawnshop
to provide income from interest on loans, the estate had to be reorganized
under an incorruptible manager lest “the elegance of the mountain workyards
merely serves to bring in funds from ﬁrewood and stock raising.” The farmland was therefore expanded to 3,000 mou and the “mountain forests” to over
10,000 mou, with more than 7,000 fruit trees.43 As has been said earlier, the
late-imperial Zunhua economy was to be a combination of elements from
these three sources, with the different modes mutually supporting each other.
Growing fruit trees and silviculture were ancient local skills. Intensive dry-ﬁeld
farming was a northern-plain component brought in by Han Chinese.
Herding and hunting were the Wuzhong and Qidan contributions. The

284

Particularities

models for the agro-pastoral-silvicultural economy that we ﬁnd in lateimperial times in Zunhua were thus already established by this period.
Knowledge of the centuries before the Chinese re-established themselves
under the Ming was hazy even at the beginning of this dynasty. This gap in
memory could haunt scholars of later times. Toward the end of the nineteenth
century, Ding Wei, a holder of the metropolitan degree, wrote “An investigation into Back Lake,” in the attempt to reconstruct the past of an area known
as the ‘Forest Off To One Side’, about ﬁfteen kilometers west of the county
capital of Yutian.44 It is one of the ﬁrst attempts at environmental history in
China, and so worth quoting at length,
During the reign of the Emperor Shizong of the Jin, from 1161 to 1189, the
area had been the site of an imperial traveling lodge, and designated the ‘Royal
Forest’. But there was no forest there in Ding’s day:
Granary South Of The Forest is one of the eight market towns of our
county. To the north of it lie marshy thickets known as ‘Back Lake’. . . . An
old tradition has it that this was the hunting enclosure of the Qidan empress
Xiao.45 There is, though, no evidence that this was so.
The History of the Jin records a “Royal Forest for the Imperial Traveling
Lodge at Yutian.” It provides an extremely detailed account of the comings
and goings involved in the emperors’ tours there. For the most part, they
went to hunt. . . . For the fall hunt they always went to Jizhou, but the
springtime hunt was invariably held at Yutian, which must have had
swamps and thickets where they could engage in ﬁshing and the chase. My
personal view is that Back Lake meets the requirements for this. Some may
ﬁnd fault with this as a forced interpretation, but it is one that I ﬁnd I
cannot avoid. Here is why:
I have reﬂected that though I was born and grew up in the town of
Granary South Of The Forest, . . . I have never known from where the name
‘South Of The Forest’ was derived. Now, six kilometers east of the town is a
village called ‘East Of The Forest’. Four kilometers west of the town is
another village, called ‘West Of The Forest’. Where, today, is this ‘forest’? Back
Lake is directly to the north of South Of The Forest, and located exactly
between East Of The Forest and West Of The Forest. It is spacious and open,
yet secluded and hidden away. Water is abundant at all times of the year.
At the start of the Yongzheng reign-period [in 1723], several tens of
hectares of wet-ﬁeld rice-paddies were in operation here, with only the
center of the lake left as a reservoir. Later on this latter was occupied by
crafty folk, and farmed. . . .

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

285

Today, these wet-ﬁeld paddies have become choked with rushes and
weeds. When one passes through the area one thinks mournfully of how
swift is the change in landscapes in the course of time. Lush vegetation
stretches as far as the eye can see, the smoke rising from the hamlets
blending with the bluish verdure of the hills. A place where, when the breeze
is mild, the overﬂowing waters gentle, and the clouds low, the ﬁsh swim idly
by and birds take their ease, while animals like foxes and badgers make their
way unobtrusively up and down, appearing and disappearing in its midst.
Whether one uses a hook or shoots with a bow and arrows, one always hits
one’s quarry.
It happens at times, when the grasses have withered and leaves fallen from
the trees, and the height of the water is down so the sands extend out level,
that brave men with eagles on their forearms, and brown hounds on leashes
behind them, come out on excursions with fur-caparisoned horses and
attendants following them. This is because its untenanted space serves as a
hunting-ground, and why it is the most celebrated of the swampy thicketed
areas in our county.
Imagine in addition the lavish arrangements of an enclosed park for
hunting, embellished with palaces and residences, and it is not hard to
reconstruct in one’s mind a ‘Weeping Willows’ traveling lodge for an
emperor or a ‘Soaring Forest’ enclosure for the chase.46 What other location,
apart from this, ﬁts so well with having been where long ago the Jin rulers
hunted in Yutian? So one may sigh: we need look no further for what was
once called the ‘Royal Forest’. What is more, the word ‘forest’ in the names
of the villages and towns also derives from this. It is apparent that what is
today Back Lake was anciently a wood. . . . That in times gone by it was the
hunting-ground of emperors is hardly to be doubted.
How are we to be certain that the traces left by the Jin were not inherited
by them from the Qidan? If this were so, it would not seem impossible that
we can push back the place’s use as a hunting enclosure to Empress Xiao. It
is essential, though, to look for the site of the imperial traveling lodge. The
departmental gazetteer records that there were broken bricks in the ground
by the Decorated Pavilion of Empress Xiao, which served as witnesses. This
was later enough to prompt His Honor Ji Jiguang to carry out excavations
[in the sixteenth century]. . . . I have heard, moreover, that at the time when
the wet-ﬁeld paddies were in operation, and they were dredging the reservoir formed by the center of the lake, they found iron chains several tens of
feet in length, as well as miscellaneous objects whose high value was consistent with their coming from the Decorated Pavilion. Much the same holds
true for the mirrors and coins that are recorded as having been obtained,

286

Particularities

but if we do not have access to those who found them, how can we speak
rashly? This does not apply to the ﬁnds by certain people in certain places
of objects modeled in clay such as tiles in the form of bronze birds, or bricks
shaped like quincunxes of phoenixes, things that one does not set eyes on in
normal life. To sum up, a palace, a forest, and things pertaining to them,
have not been found anywhere except Back Lake.
For recent times we must take into account that small groups of cow lads
and aged woodcutters have sometimes glimpsed, half-hidden in the mists, city
walls and the gate towers of palaces, which vanished when they approached
them more closely, like mirages at sea. These uncanny wonders relating
to Back Lake vie with each other to be passed on from one person to the
next. I would not be so presumptuous as to doubt them. Were I to do so, I
would be even more imposing my own interpretation, and doing no more
than ridiculing them as the deluded tales of village folk. For the moment, let
us appraise the matter on the basis of what is reliable in the histories and on
what people have witnessed collectively, this being of more substance than
what has only been seen often [by individuals], and so test the credibility of
our conclusions.
What is interesting is the effort to reconstruct the memory, not so much of a
people—since neither the Qidan nor the Jin were Chinese—as of a place.
There was a powerful response to the appeal of archaeology, the emergence
out of the soil of artifacts from a different world, eloquent and yet bafﬂingly
mute. There was also a sense that the presence of an extraordinary past could
linger in its old haunts, and show itself ﬂeetingly to ordinary people.
When, toward the close of the Mongol dynasty in the mid fourteenth century,
Pan Boxiu, who hailed from southern Zhejiang, wrote an attack in verse on
foreign rule over China, he spoke as if he was in the Yan mountains.47 Whether
in fact or in imagination it is not possible to be certain—probably imagination—but the place was appropriate to his theme.
His reference-laden lines need a commentary in advance. The term ‘Liao’
indicates the Qidan people, whose Liao dynasty ruled Manchuria and the
surrendered sixteen northeastern prefectures in Northern Song times. Many of
the senior ofﬁcials under the Mongols were drawn from lands to the west of
China, and even spoke Persian, not Chinese or Mongol, as their lingua franca.
The term ‘fair lord’, which normally has the singular sense of ‘the ruler’, is
construed here in the plural to ﬁt better with this western origin. The term
‘gold’ suggests the Jin or ‘Gold’ dynasty of the Jürchen people who ruled
northern China for most of the twelfth century.48 The phrase ‘tussocked dunes’

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

287

is an ampliﬁcation of a reference to a sandy area in Shaanxi, near where the
Luo River joins the Wei, not far from the great bend to the east taken by the
Yellow River. This place49 was a long way away from the Yan mountains, which
reinforces our impression of a poem conceptualized rather than observed.
It had long been famous as a grazing-ground for horses, who here symbolize
the invaders. Cranes, on the other hand, were the mounts of Chinese ‘immortals’. The brambles suggest the abandonment of farming, while the eagles may
hint at Chinese heroes. The oddest feature is the use of the porcupine to represent Chinese resistance to foreign occupation, but he had the reputation of
being a ﬁerce beast, capable of ﬁghting with tigers and shooting his quills into
humans,50 and the context seems to make this reading inescapable.
The Liao sea, to the east, is an emptiness, whence no crane is now coming
back.
Sleet, falling, chills the horizons of these uplands cluttered with brambles.
Heaven’s vault does not move in the frost. The circling eagles have
vanished.
The fall sky’s high aloft, above tussocked dunes, where the well-fed horses
are pastured.
Our fair lords, from the land where the sun sets, are singing of military
discipline.
In the wind from the west, the hunting horsemen grip the Gold bridle and
bit.
But the porcupine, ﬁercely facing forward, has taken his stand and now
risen,
Having broken clear by braving the onslaught of bows twanging and
arrowshafts whistling.
The ﬁrst four lines of Pan’s poem show how landscape could at times be used
as a political metaphor. But the political metaphor, by how it is chosen and
formulated, also tells us something about the nature of the landscape.
After the Ming reconquest Zunhua county abutted on the rebuilt Great
Wall, being home to many of the garrison troops. In 1513 the magistrate, Li
Xinjian, after three years in the job, had a stone inscribed and set up in his
ofﬁce compound so that those who succeeded him could “understand the
difﬁculties of this county, and the unending terrors of this ofﬁcial post.” He
noted that by his time there were only slightly more than two thousand registered households of commoner–civilians in a jurisdiction extending about a
hundred and ﬁfty kilometers in each direction. He ascribed this reduction in
the population to the ravages committed by the soldiery, which had induced
many civilians to return to their old homes elsewhere, and also to the vexations

288

Particularities

of taxes and compulsory labor-services. He was surprisingly frank about the
way in which he was outranked by the local top brass:51
At the most honorable of levels, the regional military authorities exercise
their supervision here. At the most onerous of levels, the generals in charge
of external military affairs exercise their commands from here. The soldiers
under the Three Guards Camp are stationed here on frontier garrison duty.
The hay and grain for nine battalions and thirty fortiﬁed camps at the
barriers are supplied from here. In a more distant context, the tribute to the
Court from the Duoyan Mongols52 starts off on its journey to Beijing from
here. Closer to hand, there has been a constant increase in the passage of
imperial carriages, relatives of the imperial family by marriage, and meritorious ofﬁcials through here.
This jeremiad suggests a crucial point. A century and a half later the
Manchu–Qing conquest brought to an end the multimillennial war between
farmland and steppe. By the middle of the seventeenth century the Wall was no
longer a frontier zone, and most of this military superstructure vanished. What
was left behind was an enclave of environmentally underexploited terrain.
Emotions associated with the Wall likewise changed once it was no longer a
threatened line of defense. In Ming times, when it still was, Li Panlong wrote
in a poem about it that “I do not know if any place, here, is not deserving of
grief.”53 Under the Qing, however, Li Xijie took explicit delight in how the new
dynasty had transcended the age-old conﬂict, and made obsolete the
euphemistic names that Chinese governments had previously bestowed on
their beleaguered border territories:54
The snow on the hills is so hazy, that one’s sunken eyes strain to see.
Filing out through the Great Wall the horses are trembling and freezing.
These days, to style it ‘a frontier pass’ is something that’s almost ceased.
— Who ﬁrst called this ancient commandery by the name of ‘Northern
Peace’?
Those of strong and heroic temperament rise up to be seasoned generals.
Those whose theories follow success or defeat are but contemptible
pedants.
This Great Work now takes its repose, that was once Qin’s especial splendor.
— Do we know how long past the Mountains of Yan acquired their historic
celebrity?
The implied answer to the question with which each stanza ends is something
like ‘time out of mind’. ‘Northern Peace’ is of course ‘Beiping’. A frontier that

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

289

had seemed immutable had gone. Emotional responses had dissolved and
recrystallized differently.
By the middle of the eighteenth century, educated people’s experience of the
Yan mountains had also changed again. Once synonymous with the clash of
cultures across a frontier that had lasted, with shifting fortunes, for more than
two thousand years, they had become transformed into a tourist attraction.
One sign of this was a little guide, entitled The Ten Scenes of Zunhua, which is
reproduced in the department gazetteer. Each entry consists of a topographical description followed by a poem from the brush of Fu Xiu, who served for
a time as the department magistrate.55
Omnipresent these outstretched ranges of Yan, where once lay the Yuyang
domain.
In unbroken succession, the overhung cliffs, stacked above with new
growth in green layers.
Their uplifted landforms seem empty of substance, as if cut adrift from
their base.
In touch with the skies, uprising, protruding — one might think they were
soaring away. . . .
I turn back my steed on the lofty ridge, my thoughts ﬁlling with history’s
residues,
And examine the rock-walls — multitudinous — hazy, errant, with no
ﬁxed direction.
The dramatic millennial fault-line between cultures had become scenery.

The imperial tombs
Under the Qing, Zunhua became the location of the eastern group of imperial
tombs. Seven preconquest Manchu rulers had been buried in Manchuria at
three sites near Mukden. The ﬁrst of those to be entombed here was the
Shunzhi Emperor, who ruled from 1643 to 1661 (though the reign-period by
which he is usually known did not start until 1644). The Zunhua group also
included the great emperors Kangxi, who reigned from 1661 to 1722, and Qianlong who was on the throne from 1735 to 1796 (but died in 1799). Others there
were the Xianfeng and Tongzhi emperors from the nineteenth century, and the
famous—or infamous—Empress Dowager Cixi, who lived from 1835 to 1908.
A third imperial burial site was inaugurated west of Beijing by the Yongzheng
Emperor, who ruled from the end of 1722 to 1735. Others buried in the western
tombs were the Jiaqing, Daoguang, and Guangxu emperors.

290

Particularities

The tombs were sited just to the north of the Wall, and are now historical
monuments. When they were still so to speak ‘alive’, the state maintained
around them a ring of ‘mountains out of bounds for geomantic reasons’.
Geomancy, or ‘winds and waters’, is Chinese earth-magic. Since ordinary
hunting was taboo here, the area turned into a nature park, and otherwise
hunted animals like deer ﬂourished. Today the area around the mausolea is
one of the largest reserves in the People’s Republic.56
Though there were always skeptics, most late-imperial Chinese believed to
a greater or a lesser degree in sepulchral geomancy, that is, that the relationship of an ancestor’s grave with the hidden forces coursing through the earth
had an effect on the fortunes of his or her descendants. So it was that when, in
the later nineteenth century, Li Hongzhang, the governor-general of the
province that is today Hebei, wanted to open a railroad to service a new coal
mine just to the south of Zunhua, his opponents accused him of menacing the
geomantic well-being of the dynasty’s tombs. Even if probably only a pretext
covering other motives (especially since it only ran across the southeast corner
of the department), it was an accusation not easily overcome.
The tomb complex lay in an enclosed valley north of the Wall, about seven
kilometers from north to south, on the south-facing slopes of the Abundance
Terrace Range of mountains (fengtái lı̌ng) rather more than thirty kilometers
west of the departmental capital. The more grandiose title of Phoenix Terrace
Mountains (fèngtái shan) was bestowed on them for this purpose, a characteristic Chinese name-magic operation. In 1662 the designation of the principal
peak was altered once again, this time to Gloriously Auspicious Mountain,
which was even better nomenclatural wizardry. It was appointed an ‘Altar to
the Earth’ where sacriﬁces were performed. The gazetteer for Zunhua tells us
that the entire peak has the form of the tablet used by both an emperor and
his ofﬁcials to write on during sessions of the Imperial Court, and that “its
shape resembles the Umbrella of State.”57 Choosing this spot was thus also
conﬁguration-magic, which we have already met in less exalted guise in the
cinnabar mines of Guizhou.
The ‘Pool of Heaven’ in the following passage from the gazetteer is a literary
name for the sea, and translations of place-names are given instead of mere
transcriptions in order to convey the feeling of the piece. Topographical
features acquired an evocative power deriving from names and semblances.
The Mist-Magic Mountains Of The Emperors To Come arrive here from the
Great Line Mountains, winding this way and that down to the Pool of
Heaven. The multitudes of pinnacles are arrayed in natural fashion like an
enclosure wall. To the front rises Golden Star Hill, while behind runs the
Watershed Range. To the east are Tallyﬁsh Pass and Aster Gorge, while to the

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

291

west lie Broadhunt Gorge Pass and Mount Yellowﬂower. All of these scenic
points constitute a surrounding entourage paying court to the imperial dead
just as the countless stars bow down before the Pole Star. Streams on their
separate courses ﬂow to either side, embracing the location, which they serve
as outer halls and inner garments. They then join together in the Dragon
And Tiger Gorge, to pay court to the Gulf of Bohai into which they discharge.
The position-power of the site is strong and its arteries [along which the earthforces travel] are far-reaching. It is the multi-multimillennial foundation
of our Qing dynasty from which this latter derives its solidity and durability.
The tombs were conceived of as a secret magical accumulator of forces from
which the dynasty replenished its strength.
The beauty of the approach to the tombs moved several of the emperors to
pen verses on their journeys to and fro. These may often have been polished by
the scholars in their entourages—who knows?—but a handful are ﬁne evocations of a countryside that was cool, rich, and healthy. An example is the
Kangxi Emperor’s “stanza improvised while in the imperial palanquin on the
road through Plum Tree Gorge”:58
As the single rivulet bends and unrolls, We behold the mountainside
blooms,
Our bearers stepping on moss-covered stones, where the willows lean in
from the vertical.
We look for those trees whose fruits in abundance are just now on the
point of maturing,
Green hazelnut husks and excellent plums, both deserving of Our
superlatives.
His somewhat baroque ballad on the hot spring at Lucky Spring Temple, to
which an imperial travel lodge was attached, is perhaps more characteristic of
imperial versifying. It is born of a mental state that moves back and forth
between a sharply observed reality and a self-congratulatory fantasy distilled
from history, myth, and metaphysics. Square Vase and Rounded Peak were two
of the ﬁve island-mountains of the immortals. The Purple Fungus was an
omen of good government. The Scarlet Herb was a food that bestowed eternal
life. Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, almost two thousand years before this
poem was written, had built a Palace of Outﬂowing Fragrance, to which an
allusion is made. Pills made from stalactites were reputed to convey longevity,
and true Daoists were thought to be obliged to wear ‘Metal Stalk Flowers’ in
their hair. Emperor Wu is also said to have left out a basin at night to catch
dew, in the belief that drinking it would confer immortality. The Bright Force
and Dark Force are of course the yin and yang. The Jasper Orchards were a part

292

Particularities

of the domain of those who had achieved perpetual life. What follows is about
two-thirds of the original:
The warm water, from the hot spring, is both transparent and bubbling:
A source for immortals, trickling up from far off, out of the long-life
cinnabar.
On ritual bath-days, the magic-ﬁlled liquid brims over here in abundance,
Its faint ripples, and imperceptible tremors, ﬂowing past Us like jadestones
tinkling.
As it starts to run down the stone conduit’s slabs, the overﬂow’s sunwarmed and smooth,
Filled, scalding, with power that can, unequivocally, challenge the
sunbeams in ardor,
And, while eddies, and jade-green rapids, give transient rest to dropped
blooms,
Under blue-green summits that darken the sun, the frostbound forests are
sparkling.
The stream meanders between the soft sand spits, then enters the railed-off
precinct.
Bricked about with its ornamented stones, how profound is its limpidity!
Just as Mount Square Vase, and Rounded Peak, grow warm by themselves
in season,
So the Purple Fungus and Scarlet Herb still ﬂourish throughout the
winter.
As the inner hall’s opened, the fragrance diffuses, and precipitates stalactite
marrow.
The low basin collects enough dew of long life for the metal-stemmed
ﬂowers to ﬂoat.
Health’s vigor is stored, as Bright Force and Dark Force come into a perfect
balance.
To recount how Fire’s potency helps other beings is hard to ﬁnd words to
evoke. . . .
We cannot be far from the Jasper Orchards, when here on Our seasonal
visits.
Our mind is composed, and at peace, when it contemplates all these
perspectives.
Clear, embroidered hills, in multiple colors, lie silently in the distance,
While about Whale Rock, the wild duck, and wild geese, ﬂy crisscross in all
directions.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

293

Why’s this spring so unique in the way that it manifests numinous
miracles?
Tens of thousands of years of valiant deeds gird round Our imperial citadel!
Dreams of the eternity of the self and of everlasting dynastic survival merge,
both of them elusive, problematic, and inﬁnitely desirable. At the same time
Kangxi conveys the sense that the place was healthy. He may of course have
been inclined to say this because Shunzhi, the ﬁrst Manchu emperor of China,
was entombed here; but it seems reasonable to assume that the location would
not have been chosen in the ﬁrst place if it had not been so.
The Qianlong Emperor, a compulsive writer of mostly indifferent verses,
also left poems describing the Zunhua countryside. When escorting his
mother to visit the tombs of Shunzhi and Kangxi in October 1739, he noted the
severity of the cold:59
The sharp edge to the weather spurs forward Our cavalcade,
As the dazzle of hoarfrost crystals scatters round us at break of day.
The harvest has been gathered in. There’s delight in the hamlet lanes,
And distended stomachs everywhere in Our outermost inner domain.
Ten years later, in the last days of April, on another trip to the mausolea, he
described the spring:60
On balks running between the ﬁelds, weeds ﬂourish, a limitless green.
The kingﬁsher hue of the dike-top willows seems as if it wished to
congeal.
As Our eyes encounter the fertile tilth, which is moist and glossy, and
sleek,
Our dedication, and awe before Heaven, grow many times deeper and
deeper.
Sentiments for public consumption, but not necessarily insincere. Qianlong
was a workaholic.
Inside the funerary complex itself a central axis ran in a straight line from
north to south. It began at the Gloriously Auspicious Mountain, passed
through the tomb of the Shunzhi Emperor, and continued down a long avenue
to a roofed ceremonial Dragon And Phoenix Gateway with ﬁve entrances.
South of this stood Shadow Wall Hill, presumably as a protective screen against
the intrusion of harmful inﬂuences. The avenue curved round this hill and then
resumed its original alignment until it reached the Great Red Portal, the main
entrance, outside of which stood another ceremonial gateway and yet another
protective hill. The other tombs mostly lay to either side of this central axis, and
were connected to it by lateral avenues in a design that had some similarities to

294

Particularities

the layout of a genealogical chart, though also some differences. Thus the
Shunzhi Emperor’s mother’s tomb was placed outside the main enclosure,
perhaps because she was only attached to, but not of, the imperial line.
A basic rule seems to have been that each mausoleum had to have its own
mountain presiding to the north at its back. The individual sites are also depicted
as adorned with scattered stands of pines, trees that symbolized evergreen perpetuity. The burial chambers themselves were ‘underground palaces’ where incense
was permanently burning, and food was prepared for the deceased in a ‘spirit
kitchen’. Above ground, along the ‘spirit way’ to the Shunzhi Emperor’s tomb
were stone carvings of animals, real and fabled, lying down and standing.
The main complex was ringed by a ‘geomantic enclosing wall’ wherever the
mountains themselves were not an adequate barrier. Further outside lay
the boundary of the forbidden zone, a circular avenue called The Fire Way
Of The Emperors To Come. It was about 190 kilometers in circumference, and
thus, on the assumption that it approximated a true circle, surrounded an area
on the order of 60 kilometers across. It was protected by 352 guard stations,
which would therefore have been rather more than 500 meters apart. The
perimeter was also demarcated by 940 so-called Red Stakes, which would by the
same logic have been about 200 meters from each other. There were also lines of
White Stakes and Blue Stakes marking further zones outside this inner core.
Most economic activities by commoner–civilians that would have provided
part of the resources of the local economy under the previous dynasty were
banned inside these geomantically sensitive areas. According to the Respectfully Determined Laws and Precedents of the Great Qing:61
There are boundaries indicating prohibitions both to the front and the rear
of the mountains. If anyone, within the line of Red Stakes, thievishly cuts
down the trunks of trees, removes soil or stones, opens kilns for charcoal [or
possibly ceramics], or starts ﬁres to burn the mountains for short-term
farming, he shall be beheaded as if he had stolen imperial vessels used for
sacriﬁces to the gods. A memorial is to be submitted requesting the ﬁnal
decision on such matters.
As to the area outside the Red Stakes, but within the boundaries of the
government-owned mountains, the restrained collection of branches and
leaves for fuel is still to be allowed in accordance with the former regulations, and need not be banned. In parallel fashion, when commoner–
civilians are repairing their houses or family graves, if they extract soil from
pits dug not much more than ten feet deep, and gather and make use of
loose stones on the mountainsides that are not more than ten feet in length,
or cut down and take away privately owned trees that they have planted
themselves, none of these activities is to be forbidden.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

295

If, beyond these permitted activities, anyone thievishly cuts down
ofﬁcially owned trees, opens the mountains to quarry the rock, digs deep
trenches in the earth, sets up kilns to burn charcoal [or ﬁre ceramics], or
lights ﬁres to set the mountains ablaze for temporary farming, in the zone
outside the Red Stakes but within the White Stakes, this shall be illegal as it
would be within the Red Stakes. The chief culprits shall be given a hundred
blows with the heavy bamboo and banished to three years military service on
the frontier . . . If such acts are committed outside the line of the Blue Stakes
but still within the ofﬁcially owned mountains, the chief culprits will be
given ninety blows with the heavy bamboo, and banished for two years
frontier military service. . . .
If subordinate ofﬁcers or soldiers accept bribes and deliberately allow the
commoner–civilians to do as they please, they shall be deemed guilty of the
same crimes. . . .
Those who privily enter within the line of the Red Stakes or the Fire Way,
and steal livestock and stun them to death, shall for two months wear the
punitive collar, with a label describing their misdeeds, in a place near to where
the crime was committed. When they have done this time, they shall be sent
to serve as soldiers on the remotest frontier where malaria is prevalent. . . .
Those who conceive the idea of making their livelihood illegally within
the boundaries, and as a result in negligent fashion engage in ﬁre-based
farming, so causing the ﬂames to burn through the vegetation and trees,
shall wear a labeled punitive collar for two months at a place near the scene
of their crime. When this period has expired, they shall be sent to Xinjiang
[in the Far West], where they will be allocated farmland and made to perform
labor-services. . . .
If any of the commoner–civilians in Zunhua, Jizhou, Miyun, or Pinggu, that
is, in the departments and counties adjacent to the forbidden areas around the
imperial tombs, thievishly cuts down any of the ‘sea trees’ [probably pines],
illegally transports them out of the mountains, stores them in a hideout, or
sells them, the department and county magistrates who have failed to detect
these activities shall be demoted one rank and sent to serve elsewhere.
As so often in premodern China, and elsewhere, the conservation of nature
was thus based on a preoccupation with the numinous and the supernatural.
And, as so often, its most implacable opponent was economic self-interest,
which here pitted the livelihood of the local poor against the punishments
imposed by their masters. All of this conﬂict softened, of course, by the saving
compromise of corruption.
The imperial tombs were a favored site for the appearance of superﬂora and
superfauna.62 It was a traditional Chinese belief that a preponderance of

296

Particularities

virtuous acts by humankind in particular places would evoke an auspicious
response from Heaven, notably in the form of seasonal weather. Morally
admirable government by the emperor was thought to attract certain further
especial marks of approbation. Those at the eastern tombs included multicolored clouds, which were reported in 1677 and 1723. The most important were
the appearance of the species of Achillea, akin to milfoil and sneezewort, used
for casting oracles when consulting the Book of Changes, auspicious fungi, and
the phoenix. All but one of these signs recorded in the Zunhua gazetteer date
from the reign of the Emperor Yongzheng, that is, late 1722 to late 1735, a
monarch who was notoriously addicted to them. He was in all likelihood a
usurper, and may have felt the need for reafﬁrmations of celestial support and
signs of approval from his deceased father, by whose mausoleum the auspicious
mushrooms always grew, to bolster his claim to legitimacy and assuage his
internal guilt. The fungi displayed “all ﬁve colors mixed together in bright
splendor, with the beauty of gold and the substance of jade, in their uncanny
strangeness far removed from the commonplace.” They appeared three times,
in 1728, 1729, and 1734, and were reverently preserved, carefully packed, in a
pavilion near Kangxi’s tomb. Species not identiﬁed.
The phoenix, sovereign of the birds, appeared in 1729 on the Celestial
Terrace Mountain above the tombs. He was described as follows:
He perched on the topmost summit, being ﬁve to six feet in height, with
plumage resembling brocade. He possessed all ﬁve colors, interwoven in
lustrous brilliance. The multitude of other birds encircled him where he
stood, after which he ﬂew off northward, singing.
The gazetteer compilers do not list any more such speciﬁc events after the
Yongzheng reign, observing that while many were seen, they do not dare “to
engage in excessive praise.” One suspects they were steering a course between
a necessary expression of respect for the capacity of later emperors to elicit
favorable responses from Heaven, and a dislike of the excesses of some of
Yongzheng’s fawning ofﬁcials. There is no overt expression of skepticism. This
would have been politically disastrous. As regards their private opinions, one
may legitimately wonder.

Economy, environment, demography
The department, as it became under the Qing, was expanded to contain three
cities: the department capital north of the main watershed, and the county
capitals of Fengrun and Yutian to the south of it. The climate in this period

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

297

was probably very close to that prevailing at the present day, being markedly
seasonal, with the mean monthly temperature, as recorded between the 1950s
and 1980s, dropping below –7º Celsius in January but rising above 24º in July.
Rainfall today is about 755 millimeters annually, more than three-quarters of it
falling in the summer months from June through August. The historical staple
foods such as millets, wheat, kaoliang (sorghum), and beans, with a little rice,
were joined under the Qing by maize and sweet potatoes from the New World.
We also now have documentation for the local earthquakes. The worst on
record was the one that almost totally destroyed the department capital walls
in 1679. Their structure was rammed earth lined inside and out with large
bricks, which must have been quite tough, but they had been battered intermittently during the previous seventeen years by ﬂoods. A lesser tremor in 1888
brought down the tower at the northeast corner and a section of the southeastern city wall.63
Under the Qing, most of the good farming land in Zunhua was allocated to
members of the Eight Banners, the organizations that controlled the hereditary troops whose forebears had entered the service of the Manchus before the
conquest. The bannermen then rented it to Han commoner–civilians. These
tenants are said to have had little left over after paying Banner-land rents.
“When they meet with disasters or dearth it is not easy for them to continue
farming.”64 Some time between 1868 and 1871, when he was governor-general
of the metropolitan province, Zeng Guofan remarked of the difﬁculty of
raising money locally for the repair of the walls of the departmental capital
that “Zunhua’s territory is close to the imperial mausolea. Most of the
commoner–civilians are tenant households. Wealthy commoners are rare. In
addition to this, the afﬂictions of ﬂood and drought in successive years have
left them unable to respond any more.”65 Seen from the perspective of the ordinary people, Zunhua was not rich.
Many of them nonetheless enjoyed security of tenure:66
Households renting Banner land also pay a fee proportionate to the area of
the land [when taking over]. . . . They also establish an undertaking about
withdrawing or continuing in the lease. . . . Provided they do not accumulate defaults on the rental charges, the landlord may not expel them from the
land or raise the rent. In cases where owners invite in tenants but do not take
this fee . . . the raising or decreasing of the rent, and the expulsion or retention of the tenant may both be done as suits the landlord’s convenience.
There also seems to have been an unusual stability of employment:67
Everyone has a job. The potters, the metalworkers, the tilers, the carpenters on
down to those who hire themselves out for service as substitutes for others, all

298

Particularities

of them live by their own exertions. For this reason there are few vagabonds,
and people’s skills do not include misplaced and immoral ingenuity.
The abundance of timber also made a contrast with the shortage in most
other parts of China by the late Qing. Pine forests were found all along the old
frontier, and yellow pine was extensively used by the people of the department
for building houses and making implements and utensils. Pines were also
plentiful enough to support the extraction of resin:68
Sometimes they do not cut the trunk completely, but only so that it will
no longer produce shoots though it is not dead. The resin gathers at the
base, and after a long time becomes transparent and easy to burn. They cut
off pieces and bundle them up to serve as torches. . . . These are greatly
superior to plaited bamboos.
Willow was used to make chairs and stools as it resisted well both humidity
and heat. “The price is cheap and the workmanship needed is limited.” Thin
planks were used for measuring-boxes, baskets, and crates. Extremely thin
splints were encrusted with sulfur to make matches.69
Active silviculture was practised. In the mountains along the old frontier the
sprouts of horsetail pines that had generated naturally from seed were carefully transplanted, manured, watered, and banked up. Sometimes seeds were
sown directly under the protection of small wooden cloches, which were later
replaced as the saplings grew with small brush screens to break the wind.70 By
comparison with other areas, where timber was much more expensive, it can
be deduced that naturally growing trees were still sufﬁciently abundant in
Zunhua to reduce the anxieties about losses through theft, ﬁres, and even
lawsuits, that tended to restrict the long-term investment needed in silviculture in late-imperial China even when prices were high.
Environmental factors prevented the development of more than a small
amount of intensive wet-ﬁeld rice farming. Because of the sandy nature of the
soil, water tended to soak away out of the ﬁelds.71 While some hydraulic
schemes were apparently durable,72 many of those involving diversions gave
rise to maintenance problems, tending to silt up.73 It is, however, arguable that
more intensive agriculture would have increased rather than reduced
economic risk, and hence might have increased stress. A denser population
might have been economically in a more precarious position; and the
economy might have become locked in to the expenditure of the labor, time,
resources, and administrative capacity needed for crucial hydraulic maintenance. Overall, especially given the easy availability of wood and water,
late-imperial economic stability in Zunhua was probably good compared with
most of the rest of China.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

299

This is not to say that the farmers did not practise the most careful utilization of resources. The gazetteer says of millet that74
The husks can be fed to livestock, and the bran to pigs. The stalks . . . can
repair the rooves of houses and serve as a covering for the tops of walls.
They can also be a fuel. If one burns them for a long time the heat can melt
the iron of a cooking pot. They can, further, be cut into short lengths to feed
mules, horses, cows, and donkeys.
Stability is not the same as afﬂuence.
Women’s work and women’s recreations are almost invisible in the lateQing gazetteer for Zunhua. Two passages suggest a social and economic
restraint that contrasts with Jiaxing:75
The women do not have the custom of walking out in search of sexual
encounters.76 Those who are poor carry out food to the men toiling in the
ﬁelds, hoe away weeds, or sew or spin. They do not shrink from hard work.
The women are not acquainted with farming. They merely pluck cotton and
pick beans, and at times tread the ﬁelds to harvest the wheat. In case of
necessity they will take the grain up to the threshing-ﬂoor to winnow and
ﬂail it,77 and they dehusk rice, contributing the woman’s work of cooking,
drawing water, and pounding in the mortar, year in year out. In poor families the women will also sometimes undertake other tasks such as carrying
ﬁrewood and toting manure.
The biographies of virtuous women list only one case, from the Ming, where
a faithful widow—who in this instance had two sons—“directed the farming”
and, also in this instance, “taught them to read.”78
An exception to the nearly total absence of any mention of handicraft
production by women for the market is the observation that in Yutian county
“the women plait wheat straw into braids and make hats from it . . . that are
sold everywhere.”79 Likewise:80
In the villages near Granary South of the Forest in Yutian county numerous
[women] weave rush mats, and some plait wheat stalks to make hats. Today
they no longer make hats but plait braids to form liu [?skeins, pads, pockets]
that are easy to put on the market. The diligent activities of their ﬁngertips
never cease. Old and young women alike in the villages delight in attending
to such matters.
The stony hillslopes of Zunhua were also well suited to growing cotton but
“proﬁts from spinning thread and weaving cloth are slight, and many people
have abandoned it. The inhabitants of the department were never accustomed
to weaving; they grow cotton but do nothing more with it.”81 The biographies of

300

Particularities

virtuous women list two cases, both from the Qing, in which a widow
supported her family by “spinning and weaving,”82 the ﬁber used not being
identiﬁed. The section on customs modiﬁes this over-simple picture, and also
indicates in passing that the production of cotton textiles was probably
thought of here by late Qing as work for males:83
The people of the department were originally unversed in spinning and
weaving. Merchants dealing in cloth went as far away as Deping [in Shandong province] and no nearer than Raoyang [in Hebei, near Baoding].
Their annual turnover was in tens of thousands of ounces of silver. In
recent years foreign cloth has been cheaper than [local] yarn, and foreign
yarn has been cheaper than [local] cotton. Those areas in the two counties
of the department which previously produced cotton cloth have met with
difﬁculties from reduced sales; those who spun and wove have made losses
and abandoned their businesses. Lately they have petitioned that the
Ofﬁcial Board for Encouraging Weaving that used to exist in the department capital should summon sons and younger brothers from the various
rural districts to the Board to practise weaving, and that the pupils be
provided with food and the loom-masters with bonuses. Those who have
completed their training should receive looms, and weave and sell on their
own account.
The few other scraps of information available on women’s daily lives here are
consonant with the general impression of a subdued, semisecluded, selfconsciously hard-working existence in which manual dexterity was their most
prized ability. These themes are illustrated by comments on events in the
annual calendar of activities:
Only on the sixth of the ﬁrst month do married women return to their
mother’s family for a visit, and go to their afﬁnal relations to convey the
compliments of the New Year. The ﬁve days that precede this are called
the ‘Unlucky Five’.84 Married women may not go out of their doors during
this period.85
At the beginning of spring many families stop doing women’s handicraft
work. They call this ‘the day for tabooing the needle and ﬁlling the granary’,
stating that they fear pricking the eyes of the Granary Ofﬁcial.86 On the
second day of the second month they also say they are afraid of pricking the
dragon’s eye. . . . They make fun of each other, moreover, in heedless fashion,
saying that these are compacts for the women to be lazy.87
On the third day of the third month is the Puriﬁcation Ceremony. Rope
swings are erected and the women play on them in the courtyards, and the
men play on them in the streets.88

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

301

The ﬁfth day of the ﬁfth month. . . . Snakes, frogs, scorpions, centipedes,
and geckos are called the ‘ﬁve poisonous creatures’. At noontime on this
festival day people therefore always make them into a medicinal paste. In the
women’s quarters they copy the forms of these creatures in multicolored
ﬂoss embroidery wound into a pendant clasp.89
On the seventh day of the seventh month the girls sacriﬁce to the Weaving
Lass [the star Alpha Lyrae] begging for manual dexterity, while the boys put
spiders in a little box and pray for literary talent. The preceding evening they
screen off the courtyard and set out a melon cut into an indented shape like
the petals of a ﬂower, and place needles on top of these petals, offering them
for augury. They bow to the Milky Way, make a prayer, and withdraw. After
a while they look to see if there is a spider’s web on top of the melon. If a
web has been tied, they say the girls will obtain dexterity. On this day they use
the ﬂowers [or the patterns of the web?]—whether they are moving like
clouds, are as delicate as threads, or coarse as pestles—to foretell a girl’s
manual dexterity.90
On the eighth day of the twelfth month they cook a congee of rice mixed
with beans and fruits, called ‘Eighth of the Last Month Congee’. . . . Sometimes it is playfully smeared onto the backs of the married women in order
to pray that they give birth to sons.91
On the twenty-third day of the twelfth month [when the God of the Stove
is sent off to report to Heaven on the family, his horse ﬁrst being fed with
hay]. . . the boys’ sacriﬁce is taboo to the women, who are not allowed to see it.
Young girls are forbidden to eat the sugared fruits left over from the ritual.92
The only time that men and women are reported by the gazetteer as appearing
together in public is when they “ﬁlled the roads” going to graves at the Qingming festival, though there must have been other dates in the calendar when
this regularly happened.93
Women’s life in Zunhua was not without real stresses. Wolves, for example,
still caught children in the mountain villages.94 But there are grounds for at
least cautiously suspecting that the demands of the economy on them, particularly as regards heavy physical labor in farming, may have been lighter than
on their sisters in Jiaxing and Guiyang. This must have helped them live longer.

Health and water quality
Numerous poems and travel accounts attest the quality of Zunhua’s water.
Here are a few lines written by a department magistrate:95

302

Particularities

Amid the clouds, among the mists, our city and suburbs loom grandly,
While encircling them, on every side, the viridian hills rise jagged.
The peach trees and willows, infused by spring, seem as one, on the facing
banks.
With the coming of fall, the frost on the leaves will color them red as
madder.
All day long the sounds of the springs are ﬁlling our ears with their clarity.
At every season a lush profusion of herbs and of jade-green grasses.
One local scholar wrote of water so pellucid that “one can count the ﬁshes and
shrimps,” and another of how, at night,
When, already, the silence has overtaken the farmers’ and ﬁshermen’s
songs,
The chorus of frogs on either bank incessantly goes on.96
There is a sense of vital energy everywhere.
When water was drinkable without boiling, this fact was sometimes singled
out for mention. Thus the gazetteer tells its readers that Stone-shed Mountain
“has Stone-shed Spring ﬂowing out through a stone conduit. It is sweet and
cool and ﬁt to drink.”97 This raises the obvious, and for the moment unanswerable, question of how far this was not true of other springs not given this seal
of approval.
The concern with the quality of water is evident in a poem written by Sun
Xianting, a local inhabitant.98 It is on the simple well that was used for watering
trees near the top of Round Mountain:
There are no quaint stones on this mountain, and its well is without an
enclosure.
Now the rope’s repaired, though, the source can be reached, water drawn
without running dry.
A reﬂection within it, vertically down, resembles a lonely pagoda,
In delight, to the east, corresponding, the circular mountain top rises.
On min-stone blue-green in the form of a stele, I’d wish to incise as a
supplement:
“Tradesmen making white plaster are never to chisel these residue rubbles
for limestone.
And here, along with transplanted bamboos, long may elegant saplings
ﬂourish!
Having more than enough irrigation water is something we must keep
inviolate.”99

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

303

Streams appear in probably the majority of poems about Zunhua. Thus Luo
Jingqie, in Qing times, wrote as a preface to a second stanza on a literary
drinking party at Mount Cuihua twelve or thirteen kilometers to the northeast
of Fengrun city:100
Grasses and leaves have faded away, leaving mosses the last bright green.
The light is transparent. The guests, together, gaze thoughtfully about
them.
Straight up, the twigs on the hermitage trees try to touch the sky with
their reaching.
Cradled by slopes, the switchback stream zigzags toward us down the
mountain.
Some small irrigation networks were built. The verses that Miu Siqi, a county
magistrate of Yutian in late-Ming times, wrote on the Meng Family Spring
seem to describe a simple hillside system by which water was deﬂected into
contour channels and stepped ﬁelds, with pumps for the ﬁnal stage of the
distribution process. The square-trough pallet-pumps of the translation are
actually called ‘pumps that hold their tails in their mouths’. This is an allusion
to the continuous chain of linked pallets that ran round and round, not unlike
a rough wooden version of the chain on a bicycle. As it empties trough-full by
trough-full, the discharge is periodic, hence it ‘spurts’. The phrase about
‘sweating out evil forces’ presumably refers to the gradual improvement of the
soil by the application of fertilizers and perhaps lime:101
I went out through the eastern suburbs to investigate local customs
As the spring light shone refulgent on the tree trunks of the forest.
I looked back on this glorious vista with a sense of regretful reluctance,
Then turned to my business of making good whatever was falling short.
A river, in a single course, runs down rippling here, and clear,
As though a dragon is curvetting, submerged beneath its depths.
Its current deﬂected by a bafﬂe, it is drawn off into the ﬁelds,
And every drop is worth a jade, the water is so precious.
In alternation, the light and shadow make apparent its ﬂow,
Nature’s creation that human beings can use now to perfection.
The square-trough pallet-pumps are machinery known to us from of old,
Their green spurts tumbling out and over, to water the mountain’s belly.
Its loam, enriched with moisture, spreads out in a fertile expanse,
But rice and millet each require the use of a different technique:
The low dikes already constructed, to demarcate ﬁelds and paddies,

304

Particularities

And the wet depressions and spaded-up ridges being respective key
features.
We plow when a rain shower’s fallen, to furnish us silt-free water,
So we’re on the lookout for somber cumulus starting to cover us over.
Once these contiguous fertile acres have sweated out evil forces,
We’ll have the use of every part of the lower mountain slopes.
That people should sometimes smilingly mock a raincoat of rough-spun
fabric
Is an attitude that does not accord with a generous open mind.
I have my sedan chair turned about, and start to venture back,
While the herdsmen, under the setting sun, are descending home from
the heights.
Very different from the sluggish creeks of the Yangzi delta, and its world of
levees and polders, and seawalls.
Zunhua was not, in any serious sense of the word, a ‘hydraulic society’. Many
efforts to create irrigated farming proved impossible to maintain. Thus by the
later nineteenth century, the thousand or so hectares of irrigated ﬁelds under
state management in Yutian that had been supplied with water from the
Indigo Spring and the Ronghui River early in the eighteenth century had all
turned into dry-land ﬁelds because of silting up.102
At times supplies seem to have been deliberately underutilized. This was the
case with Bubbling Pearls Spring that emerged at the foot of a mountain
through gaps between heaps of boulders. “In times of drought, people draw
water from it to irrigate their ﬁelds.”103 In other words, although it could run
with so much water after a rainstorm that the noise set the valley shaking, no
attempt was made to store the runoff and exploit it on a regular basis. It was
treated as a climatic buffer.
The main obstacle to hydraulic development was that in many areas the soil
was too sandy to retain surface water easily. The Tenfold Stream that ran down
from the Great Wall, and then to the south of the department capital, turned
after this point into a “sandy river.” “It dries up in spring but is in spate during
summer. Sometimes it is overﬂowing in the morning, but shallow by the evening,
lacking any consistency in its current, and having no ﬁxed conﬁguration.” In the
1620s, a provincial governor wanted to open a transport canal here linking
Zunhua with Jizhou to its west, in order to supply the soldiers with grain more
economically. He was unable to carry out his plan and the gazetteer comments
that his failure “may also perhaps have been because the sand is deep and the
stones unstable,104 so that it was not an easy matter to retain the water.”105 A transport canal was in fact later built, but in a different place some way to the south.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

305

The ﬁckleness of the hydrology is suggested by the case of Lake Louzi, six or
seven kilometers south of the departmental capital, and so probably part of the
unstable Tenfold Stream complex just mentioned.106 The ‘arrowhead’ is the
Sagittaria sagittifolia, a water plant whose roots are edible.
It measures three to four kilometers both north-to-south and east-to-west,
and produces lotuses and arrowheads. The site was once low-lying and
swampy. In the Chenghua reign-period [1465–87] the marsh waters ﬂowed
together here to form a small lake, so it became deep and overﬂowing.
Today, it has little by little dried out, and much of it has been developed into
arable ﬁelds.
Shallow lakes are usually short-lived, and probably hundreds of them have
either dried up or been drained in many parts of China over the last thousand
years. What is interesting, and slightly out of the ordinary, about Lake Louzi is
that, apparently without human intervention, it ﬁlled up with water before
later disappearing.
Hydrological quirkiness put an environmental limit on the intensive latetraditional Chinese-style development of Zunhua. This may even have been to
its advantage. The possibility is worth considering. Most premodern mountain
hydraulic engineering had in any case to be on a small scale. Here, as an illustration, is a description of how the locals handled the Sage Stream:107
When summer is passing into fall, and overcast, rainy weather is almost
endlessly prolonged, the ﬂow from the spring is greatly increased. It ﬂashes
with crystals of light, and pours down like a suspended curtain of pearls. In
winter and springtime, the source is stopped up. Its ceaseless dripping
resembles a string threaded with pearls. Both aspects can be beautiful.
People have cut into the rock at the base of the cliff wall to make a
channel to receive the water. The depth is three feet, and the width about ﬁve.
They have opened a hidden underground conduit from the tank to drain it,
and ground a receptacle out of the stone to receive it. From this it slowly
descends by stages into two basins. The lower of these is about a ﬁfth of a
hectare in extent, and irrigates the gardens and groves of the local people, the
water being transferred by counterbalanced baling-buckets.
On the rocks above these basins the Pavilion of Secluded Cool spreads
itself out. Mists and mountain vapors brush and press against each other.
Warm greens and cool greens glitter interwoven. The character of this
remote scenery is far away from the contamination of this world.
Scale matters. Such Lilliputian hydraulic systems cannot easily have had
much effect on a social structure. And further expansion, within the same

306

Particularities

style of technology, was thwarted by a simple constraint: the seasonal volume
of ﬂow.
The quality of Zunhua water fascinated outsiders. One such was Song Quan,
the governor of the metropolitan area in the ﬁrst years of the Manchu dynasty.
He himself came from the southern part of the north China plain, and he
expressed his feelings in a poem on Black Dragon Stream, a couple of whose
stanzas are translated below.108 The occasion for this celebration may have been
the construction, at his orders, of a brick-lined tank, eighty feet square and
nine feet deep, to store the supply it provided. Regrettably, the ﬂow of water
was blocked up by an earthquake not long afterward, possibly the one that
took place in 1679. It was running again by 1684.
There’s a spring in Zunhua department, sweet-tasting and unsullied,
Whose fame hitherto in the capital region makes it the foremost and ﬁrst.
Gushing up amidst mists by the city’s wall, and spraying out pearly
bubbles,
It’s the visage of this pure, still, place, the light swimming upon its surface.
One glance can penetrate its depths, where ﬁsh seem to hang suspended.
In the many-hued rays of the clouds at dawn, its tint resembles madder.
As springtime opens, its ripples speed, and sing with movement’s melody.
In the winter’s harshness, its duckweed leaves ﬂoat in green, luxurious,
tangles.
To Song, Zunhua had an idyllic quality. He continues, putting on a pose of
archaic simplicity, but inspired to do so by his surroundings:
When I have multiple tasks to handle, I tell servants to launch my skiff,
Where, comfortable, carried along by the breezes, I sit there taking my ease.
The people are honest, subbureaucrats few; the administration is simple,
While game from the mountains, and wilderness vegetables, make for a
governor’s feast.
Note the local diet. Song goes on to describe the state of mind needed if one is
to transcend the dusty world. He then ends:
There is no ﬁxed way through the Five Sacred Peaks for one’s feet in their
sandals of straw,
And the day may come when one doesn’t disdain the gift of a cupful of water.
This poem became well known, and numerous successors replicated its
rhyme-words, including versions by his son and one of his grandsons. One of
these successor-poems, by a local resident, Shi Enpei, begins:109

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

307

East of the Dynasty’s Eastern Tombs, and adjacent, lies Zunhua,
So in this, His Majesty’s own domain, it’s the scenery’s crowning glory:
Northeast lie the sources of nine springs that pour through the mountains’
arteries;
Southeast, the waters of ten rivers come together in swirling concourse.
The pre-eminence of the quality and abundance of Zunhua’s water was generally recognized.
Water supported hydrotherapy and tourism. The famous hot springs of
Zunhua were twenty kilometers to the northwest of the department capital.
Even in the depths of winter the water here was close to boiling. The source
came bubbling out of a mountainside and was then split into two streams. One
of these supplied a water-lily pond. The other was directed into the bathhouses. “There are separate areas for ofﬁcials and commoners, and separate
domains for men and women.” Channels and sluices let bathers have hot or
cold water as they wished. Sitting in the water for half a day was thought
instantly to cure any illness caused by “damp or cold or a swelling of the belly
due to constipation.”
Besides being a spa, it also attracted casual visitors:
Before one is within several tens of paces of the spring, the vapors rise up in
muggy gusts, steaming like a caldron on the boil, such that one cannot
approach it closely. When one does reach it, it is as clear and deep as a
mirror, so pellucid that the bottom is visible. If one tosses in a copper coin,
it will ﬂutter like a small, yellow butterﬂy, going down by folding back and
forth on itself, with supple front and back. Tourists make rather too much
of this as a strange sight. If one tries the water with a ﬁnger, it is too hot for
one to bear. If one draws out some water, it will cook raw foodstuff. It is also
of outstanding quality when compared with that from wells and ordinary
springs. The Great Transformer is in truth unfathomable!
A fascination with curious things, of course. But also a concern with, and
interest in, good water.110
It was a healthy place.

Birds and animals
The Zunhua gazetteer has detailed descriptions of the normal local birds and
animals. The entries generally begin by quoting a traditional account from a
well-known source, such as Li Shizhen’s Herbal Arranged by Headings and
Subheadings of 1596, and then follow this with comments on the local situation.

308

Particularities

Some of the descriptions cited are fanciful. An example, from this pharmacopeia, is that tigers eat the top half of victims they kill between the ﬁrst and the
ﬁfteenth days of each lunar month, but the lower half of those devoured from
the sixteenth through the thirtieth.111 The local observations are colored at
times by superstitions, and certainly not always correct, but many of them are
plausible, and even occasionally note that knowledge on certain points is uncertain. The relationships between humans on the one hand and birds and beasts
on the other cover a wide range. They include symbiosis, mutual avoidance,
consumption as prey (in both directions), mutual companionship, observation, pets, and the exploitation of animals for medical materials.
We begin with eagles:112
There are many of them in the department. Their plumage is gray and black
in an alternating pattern. Their bodies are as large as that of a goose. Their
eyes are yellow and red; and the beak is sharply tapered and hooked. They can
catch both birds and rabbits. They do not eat any of the grains, but only meat.
One arranges for someone to watch over an eagle day and night, so that
he cannot sleep. The moment that he closes his eyelashes, the person watching
over him immediately shouts at the top of his voice to wake him up. This
goes on for a hundred days, and is called ‘depriving the eagle of sleep’. After
this one of his feet is encircled with an iron ring, and more than a hundred
feet of light cord is attached to this ring. The other end of the cord is secured
to a perch-frame that can be carried through the ﬁelds.
When the handler sees a bird, he ﬁrst points it out with his hand, in such
a way that the eagle can see what his hand is indicating. The eagle will then
follow his directions. Eagles do not miss, not even once in a hundred times.
If it should ever happen that an eagle fails to catch his prey, he feels that he
has lost face, and will be unwilling to come back.
Since he is attached to the cord, he is incapable of ﬂying away. Not having
caught his prey, he is likewise unwilling to return. If one ventures to pull on
the cord, the eagle will frequently tuck in his thighs under his wingpits [and
refuse to move]. This is why those who rear and train them will always ﬁrst
gauge that a strike is totally certain, and do not dare to ﬂy them at a target
in a casual fashion.
These days four eagle-handlers have been established for each of the
imperial tombs. . . . This is so they can hunt game to be offered in sacriﬁce.
In other parts of China, however, training methods were used that were closer
to those of European falconry.113
The tuqiu, or ‘bald qiu’, was either a marabou (genus Leptoptilus) or a
similar large, stork-like, water bird.114 It was reputed to be capable of ﬁghting
with human beings and, the gazetteer tells us,

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

309

It delights in devouring ducklings, as well as worms, snakes, and other such
creatures. Eating ﬁsh gives it particular pleasure and it is constantly
stretching out its neck from the river bank. It will wait for them all day long
and not stop until it has eaten its ﬁll. . . . The mottled variety is the most
common in our department.
Neither of these two birds is mentioned in a 1994 listing of the economically
useful birds in Hebei; and ‘use’ includes being an interesting sight for tourists.115
One can guess that the marabou lost its habitat with the disappearance of most
natural wetlands, which have been drained or converted to reservoirs in recent
times, while the water quality has been degraded by pollution.116 Eagles, at the
top of the food chain, are, for their part, well known to be sensitive to shifts in
the environment.
Of domestic geese we learn that “They can submerge under water, and like
eating meat and such beasts as snakes and worms; and can keep off venomous
serpents.”117 The habits of the wild geese are noted next: their seasonal migrations, their formation in ﬂight, and the way in which one bird will stay on the
alert as a sentinel while the others sleep on the sandy islets at night. The only local
observation is that “it has traditionally been said that if someone who has grown
a tumor hears the cry of the wild geese, and lays his hand on it, it will at once fall
off.” A more reasonable popular conviction—whether it was true or not is
another matter—was that if the storks who lived along the banks of Zunhua’s
rivers began to peck at each other while calling out, then rain was certain to fall.118
Magpies are credited with prowess as predictors of seasonal weather, and
with complex cognitive processes, and something not unlike language, attributed to them.119 Much the same is true for swallows.120 Clearly, in the Chinese
view of this time, birds had brains and emotions—like eagles who could lose
face. House sparrows, incidentally, were also emotional: “They live under the
eaves and are everywhere. They are temperamentally prone to rages. Sometimes, if they are captured, they will be peevish for a brief while; then their guts
will swell up and they will perish.”121
“Every family” reared domestic hens both for their eggs and ﬂesh.122 When
fall had passed, people spread nets to catch the ﬁeld sparrows, “and make use
of them as a seasonal dainty.”123 The ‘pine pheasant’ was “the foremost mountain delicacy produced in the department.”124 The commoner ‘mountain
pheasants’ were said “to ﬂy up to roost in lofty trees once the snow has fallen,
and are never willing to come down. Many of them starve to death, so people
can get hold of them. Some can also be taken alive and reared.”125 Odd, and, if
true, very unevolutionary.
A number of other birds are mentioned in the verses elsewhere in the
gazetteer, probably including herons and/or egrets. They are not always easy to
identify precisely.126

310

Particularities

Bats lived in the cave on the Wuzhong Mountain where, in the third century
ce, the hermit Bo Zhongli had had his residence. In Qing times, Wang
Qingyuan mentions them in a poem called “Zhongli’s Cavern.”127 The ﬂeshy
mushroom, here treated with a blend of visual fantasy and ironic mockery, was
thought to confer long life or immortality.
Attaining to immortality, the immortal’s already ascended.
His empty cave remains behind, inspiring our awe, and yet formless.
When, now, will the cinnabar elixir ever be brought to perfection,
Since the quest for Authentic Mercury is being pursued no more?
His cinnabar-sublimating stove is nigh on a thousand years old.
Draughts blow about clouds of dried-up dust with their intermittent
gusts.
This is where, squirming and writhing, the bats have their abode.
One half wonders, are these the twitchings of long-life ﬂesh-pulp fungi?
Our existence — an insect’s cast-off coat — is not to be kept for ever.
The home of the ever-moving spirits is the whole world’s Immanent
Pattern.
We must be heedful of the decrees that determine our lives and deaths.
The true immortal is someone freed of ignorance and madness.
There is a self-conscious awareness that the landscape of this later age is no
longer enchanted, though the memory of a past enchantment lingers.
Moving on to animals, we ﬁnd that tigers were less a hazard to life here than
an economic resource:128
They are frequently seen in the department, in the mountains along its
boundaries. The taste of their ﬂesh is faintly salty and frowzy. The skin
furnishes the best quality of bed-covering, which is not only of great price
but also able to drive away the baneful beast-shaped demons born of the
aethers of the mountains and forests. Their stomachs, kidneys, eyes, liver,
fat, blood, fur, and bones are all ingredients of medicine. If the nose of a
tiger is suspended in a doorway, and after a year boiled into a paste, and is
given to a woman to drink, she will be able to give birth to a son who will
achieve high rank. If the intestines of a tiger are bound round the waist of a
pregnant woman, this will hasten the birth. Tiger’s whiskers used as toothpicks can stop the teeth hurting.
Whether or not traditional Chinese medicines helped their patients, they were
not good for the health of animals.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

311

Li Wei, an eminent seventeenth-century ofﬁcial, wrote a poem on an excursion he made through Sandslope Gorge, which lies northwest of the departmental capital, and out to the now obsolete Great Wall.129 His attitude toward
tigers is relaxed compared to the anxiety found in Guizhou. Perhaps this is
because he was on horseback, and someone of his importance would certainly
have had some sort of escort, though not a word is said about it.
The winding path loops back and forth, like rope round a block of
pulleys.
Having gone, in my travels, above the clouds, I pause in the saddle a
moment.
Down ﬂutters a ﬂock of pheasants, onto the hazelnut bushes.
Deep sunk the pawprints of tigers, seen pressed in a recent snowfall.
Sands and gravels sparkle like frost. I’m surrounded by blue-green bluffs.
The Wall resembles a baldric, under wide violet mists.
A miraculous trip, made on impulse! I throw back my cloak and exult,
No longer remembering the tempest-blown dust, nor that the journey
was difﬁcult.
Wolves, not tigers, were probably the main predators on human beings:130
They are found everywhere in our department. Their fur varies according to
the color of the vegetation. They hide in the grass and one never even has
the time to draw one’s sword. Those who encounter them must drop into a
squatting posture and draw a circle on the ground if they are to escape
death. They can also seize little children who are crying inside a village.
Every time a small child has been eaten by wolves it is essential to whitewash
the outside of the village wall to create a protective circle which the wolves
will not dare to cross, or else offer prayers to the gods of the mountains.
More often the humans were the hunters:131
Deer These are to be found along the boundaries of our department. It is
forbidden to hunt them, however, in the mountains around the imperial
tombs that have been put off-limits for geomantic reasons. . . . After the
antlers fall off, the bone can be used to decorate bows, or boiled into a paste
that, when crystallized, can be used as an ingredient for medicines. The tail
is a gastronomic delicacy. The venison likewise has a fragrant taste. If the fur
is stripped from the skin it can make wadding for clothing. The leather
serves for windbreakers.
There was also a pastoral sector.132 Note that ‘mountain sheep’ is the term used
for goats.

312

Particularities

Sheep The department produces them in very great numbers. There are
‘mountain sheep’ and ‘ﬂeecy sheep’. The ‘mountain sheep’ have horns that
are long and curved, and beards under their chins. There is a roll of meat on
their tail but it has a very rank odor. . . . The ‘ﬂeecy sheep’ have short horns
and no beards under their chins. Their wool is all curly and will not stay
stretched out. The ﬂesh on their tails is as round in shape as a platter. . . .
The meat is fresh and pleasant, and not frowzy. The color of the skin in most
cases is white. A ewe’s pregnancy lasts six months, and one lamb is born
each year. Those born in the spring months are much the best. There are
also cases of two births per year, but most of the lambs delivered in fall
suffer from the staggers, and it would be better if they had never been born
at all. . . . The ﬂeecy skin can serve as a fur. The fat can be made into
candles. . . . Sheep’s milk is very delicious, but it is not easy to extract it. It is
necessary to wait till the lambs are able to eat grass, and then to drive them
away to another spot. Each pair of ewes should be bound facing each other,
so they cannot move or see anything. The milk can then be obtained by
taking it from behind their tails.
Dogs were mostly kept to ward off wolves and jackals, and to guard the
homesteads at night. A few bitches were trained for hunting, and some dogs
were eaten, under the shamefaced name of ‘local mutton’. Decorative Pekinese
were also bred, and esteemed for their intelligence and ability to learn tricks.133
Likewise, because mice and rats were common in Zunhua, “many people in the
department keep cats in order to catch mice.”134
Several species served as pets, animals whose immediate function is solely
to provide entertainment or company. Yellow orioles, common in the wooded
regions, were kept in cages for their melodious singing.135 Squirrels, we are
told, two a penny where there were pine trees, “if fed for a long time and thoroughly trained, can be carried in the sleeves of one’s clothing.”136 White mice
were a speciality:137
They resemble ﬁeld mice in shape, but are white in color, with red eyes.
They nonetheless have an intelligent disposition, and are skilled at
mounting on treadmills. The people of the department rear them, housing
them in a box one side of which is adorned with a glass pane [to see them
through]. Inside an inverted pillar is installed [ﬁxed to the lid], on which
there is placed a freely turning wheel. It looks like an umbrella hanging
upside down.
When one taps the box with one’s hand, the mouse will mount the wheel.
The faster he climbs it, the more rapidly it rotates. The more one taps
with one’s hands, the more swiftly the mouse climbs. These wheels come

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

313

in several forms, but they are all toys based on climbing to make them
spin round.
One can only speculate why people have come to like pets. Perhaps those with an
afﬁnity for taming economically useful birds and animals have tended in the past
to be successful over the generations, and pleasure in having pets and manipulating them, whether inherited or learnt, or something of both, is an extension of
this afﬁnity. Even if more likely to be an economic burden than a beneﬁt. And
some pets, of course, are skilled at manipulating their human ‘owners’.
Animals thus had varying sorts of relationship with human society. A few
were seen as morally unpleasant, like the marabou, or else as remote but beautiful, like the wild geese. Or as alien but sometimes evocative images, like bats.
Some were predators, like wolves. Or a menace, like poisonous snakes. Many
more were prey. Some, like tigers, both prey and predators. Eagles, cats,
domestic geese, poultry, sheep, and dogs were servants and to some extent
companions, controlled by measures that were often ingenious. Also, in the
last four cases, food. Others again had a particular kind of intelligence, like the
magpies with their believed gift for foretelling ﬂoods and drought, or the
storks who knew when the rain was coming. White mice, squirrels, and orioles
were pets. Interactions with both wild and domestic animals were thus woven
into daily life practically, symbolically, recreationally, and imaginatively.

Plant foods
Vegetables and fruits represented a smaller proportion of the Zunhua diet than
cereals, but one crucial for most essential vitamins and minerals.138 The variety
available was startling. In broad outline, and using the nearest English equivalents to the Chinese categories, the following groups of vegetables were found:
celeries, mustards, Chinese cabbages, amaranths, aubergines, turtle-foot
bracken, garlic, onions, lettuces, parsley, turnips and radishes, yams, lily, rape
turnip, wild Chinese cabbage, day-lily, beetroot, tree pepper, chilli pepper,
cucumbers, gourds, and melons, and beans, peas, and lentils. I have used the
plural when there was more than one species.
Of these vegetables, the turtle-foot bracken was the only one that needed
special preparation. It had to be boiled in an alkaline solution, probably lye, to
get rid of its “oozing sap,” and then dried in the sun. In the northern part of
Zunhua it was “abundant along the frontier,” and “the local people consider it
to be a regular vegetable.”
Fruits and nuts were among the glories of the region. The main groups were
peaches, almonds, plums, persimmons, Chinese fruit hawthorn, Chinese dates,

314

Particularities

chestnuts, hazelnut, gingko, walnuts, yellowhorn, cherries, apples, crab apples,
‘fragrant plum’ (Prunus japonica), pears, grapes, peanut, water chestnut, and
ﬁgs. People in Zunhua are unlikely to have been short of vitamin C, which is
important in the diet for many reasons, such as the facilitation of the absorption of iron.
A special feature of local menus was the eating of the young buds of certain
trees. Those of the ‘small-leaved poplar’ for example, were heated and then
consumed. Early willow buds were soused in a mixture of oil and vinegar for
eating. The buds of the tallow tree, and also the gingko, could likewise serve as
food. Even the roots of bracken could be roasted in ashes and made into an
edible dish.139
Some vegetables could be gathered from the wild rather than cultivated.
Besides bracken, this was true for amaranth, both kinds of which “are found
everywhere. One does not bother to plant them, since they grow of their
own accord.” Lactuca denticulata, a bitter-tasting lettuce, was sown by the
wind and “much of it grows in ﬁelds lying uncultivated.” The tastiest yams
were said to be wild, though they were widely cultivated as well. Edible
mushrooms were to be found “in the dense woods and on the wide lower
slopes of the hills.” ‘Wild cabbage’ (Moricandia sonchifolia) was found in the
mountains. “In the summer its seeds fall on the ground, and grow again to
provide fall vegetables. One does not expect to have to hoe, plant, fertilize,
or irrigate it.” Eating it regularly was believed to protect one from “seasonal
epidemics.” Some wild water chestnuts were available, as were wild grapes.
Hazel trees “are very plentiful along the frontier. They all grow in the mountains, and few of them are cared for or planted.” Finger-millet (Eleusine coracana) was found “everywhere,” and “there is no need to sow it or plant it.
Many poor families gather it as a means of facing up to the winter.”140 The
day-lily, whose ﬂowers could be dried or pickled for eating, was a plant that
was originally picked wild, but had “recently” been grown in gardens as well.
A transition probably made by a number of others in earlier days. There was
thus still an environmental buffer offering some protection against a
shortage of vegetables, nuts, and even cereals, at least in the summer
months. And clearly some sort of ‘common land’ was still accessible to all
for gathering.
It was usual for farmers to have vegetable gardens. Lettuces were grown
there, as were jiang beans with their long, paired pods and slightly curved
beans. But they were, ﬁrst and foremost, the home of melons, gourds, and
cucumbers. Great horticultural art was devoted to the care of these cucurbits,
as is clear from the description of ‘yellow melons’, which may or may not have
been cucumbers:

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

315

Many of the local people erect a hedge on the northern side of their gardens
to serve as a windbreak. They dig a trench by it of rather more than a foot in
depth. Prior to this, in the ﬁrst month of the lunar year, they will have soaked
the seeds in pottery basins, so that they have all put forth sprouts. During the
second month they plant out these shoots in the trench and cover them with
wooden boards or straw mats. When it is warm, they expose them to the sun,
but when it is cold they cover them over again. In the solar period Summer
Begins [in early May] they plant out the seedlings separately.
Gardens also played a role in the introduction of new plants. When maize
came into Zunhua at the beginning of the nineteenth century, for example, it
was grown in gardens before it became a ﬁeld crop. “It is the regular food of
poor families,” says the gazetteer; and the cobs were used in winter as fuel in
place of charcoal.
Grafting saplings onto existing rootstock of the same or a closely related
species was the commonest method of producing new fruit and nut trees. Thus:
During the fall and the winter people spread peach stones in the ground.
When these experience the freezing cold, they split open, and grow in the
next springtime. Before the spring festival of the year following it is possible
to graft them.
Persimmons were grafted onto the stock of the date plum persimmon (Diospyros
lotus). Apples were grafted onto crab-apple stock, and pears onto ‘birch-leaf
pears’ (Pyrus betulaefolia). In contrast, the yellowhorn (Xanthocera sorbifolia)
was mostly reproduced either by the separation of roots or fresh sowing. But, we
are told, “grafts will also survive.”
Pruning was done regularly. Thus chestnut trees “must have their bark
stripped every other year, and their branches cut back. The following year the
nuts will be abundant. If this is done in alternate years, they will still be abundant over a period of several decades. Such are the efforts that human beings
have to make!”
The gingko, or ‘maidenhair tree’, was manipulated in a subtler fashion:
It is essential that a male and a female tree be planted together, so that the two
trees can look at each other. Only under such circumstances will [the
female] bear fruit. Sometimes this will happen if a female is near water, and
can see her own reﬂection. Failing this, a hole may be bored in her and a
small amount of male wood inserted. Or she can be transplanted.
Gingkos do have male and female trees, and the ﬁrst part of this prescription
is in a sense reasonable enough. Then it slides into fantasy. Disentangling such
combinations of useful knowledge and apparent nonsense is a characteristic

316

Particularities

problem with many premodern Chinese technical texts. It is important not
just to pick out the impressive parts and neglect the others.
Another example of this is provided by the procedures prescribed for
walnuts. Walnut trees (Juglans regia) do not have separate male and female
trees. Each tree bears both staminate male and pistillate female ﬂowers, which
are distinct. Nor, obviously, are there ‘male’ and ‘female’ nuts. But note that,
nonsense apart, the Zunhua orchard-men practised selective breeding:
The people of the department aver that those nuts with sharp ends are male,
and those without sharp ends female. If both male and female nuts are
planted together, it is easier for them to grow. They wait for high-quality
nuts on a tree to fall of their own accord. The greenish covering will naturally split open. They select the largest, with a shiny covering and shallow
wrinkles, and a heavy body, and make a sowing trench two or three inches
deep. They spread tile-sherds in this, and mix in manure. The nuts are
inserted, covered with soil, and sprinkled with water. In the freezing cold of
winter, the shell cracks, and the sapling will grow of its own accord in the
coming spring. Since there are sherds of tiling beneath it, its roots cannot
penetrate the soil vertically, which makes it easy to transplant.
Zunhua exported fruit. We are told of the ﬂowering crab apple (Malus
spectabilis) that “recently large quantities have been sent by sea to distant parts,
the price being cheap and selling them a simple matter.” Ordinary apples were
also marketed beyond the departmental boundaries. “Once the fruit harvest
has set, merchants from Tianjin will already have gathered to scrutinize the
trees and discuss prices.”
Given the severity of the winter, the storage and preservation of vegetables
and fruits was of particular importance. Part of the crop of most vegetables was
pickled. Vinegar controls the growth of bacteria and molds, and helps to
conserve vitamin C. Some were salted, or immersed in brine, which also slows
bacterial growth. A form of proto-canning was known. The leaves of the
Chinese cabbage were sometimes boiled, covered with a layer of salt and pepper,
and conserved in jars sealed tight by the weight of heavy stones. Vegetables
might also be cut into slices and dried. This was done to turnips and aubergines,
for example, and to Japanese pumpkins which were “regularly used to provide
against the winter.” ‘Tree ear’ mushrooms were dried. The pods of jiang beans
were sometimes split and hung up in a shady spot to dry, after which they could
be kept till the following spring. A whole range of methods were used on ‘yellow
beans’, the type of soybean preferred for human consumption:
The beans can be eaten [without processing], made into soy sauce, salted,
pressed for their oil, or [ground into powder and] converted into beancurd.

The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?

317

The residues from making beancurd can be fed to hogs. Human beings
sometimes make use of them to still the pangs of famine.
Fruits and vegetables could be pickled, as was commonly done with the birchleaf pear and yellow melons, aubergines, celery leaves, mustard roots, and
amaranth ﬂowers. Mostly, though, fruits and nuts were preserved in some sort
of glacé form, using honey. This was done to peaches, fruit hawthorn, chestnuts, hazelnuts, walnuts, cherries, apples, crab apples, and the peel of water
melons. No technical details are available, but the frequency with which honey
is mentioned suggests that it was plentiful locally.
Storage in cellars was of crucial importance, and close attention was paid to
whether particular species and varieties stored well or badly. Thus it was
recorded of Chinese cabbage that “the variety that is planted in the spring and
ripens in the summer neither has a good taste nor will it last for long,” while
cabbage sown in the late summer and planted out in the fall could be “put in
cellars for storage, where it must not be permitted to freeze, nor be hurt by
warmth.” Varieties with blue-green leaves “can be stored for a long time,” but
“the white ones, when eaten, are tender and delightful, but easily spoil.” The
concluding lines of the section on turnips and radishes says that “all the above
kinds ought to be put into a cellar for storage, in readiness for use during the
winter and spring. If they freeze they become unﬁt for eating.” As for the
summer squashes “they are a common daily food, but once the fall has come
they are totally unsuited to being preserved for long.” Durability was a preoccupation.
Some vegetables were grown mainly to make feed for animals. The soybeans
known as ‘black beans’ are the best example. They were roasted or boiled, then
mixed with sorghum to be fed to horses, mules, donkeys, and cattle, or else
ground into fragments for pigs “who produce fatter meat in consequence.”
How a food is eaten also affects its nutritional value. There was quite a
penchant in Zunhua for eating certain vegetables raw. An example is the root of
the variety of toothed lettuce known as the ‘bitter vegetable’, and the leaves of
some kinds of turnips. Also chilli peppers, possibly bean sprouts, and hazelnuts.
Was Zunhua’s diet then better than those of Jiaxing and Guiyang?141 The
water was probably healthier. The pastoral and hunting components that
complemented farming and gardening meant that meat was certainly more
plentiful than in Jiaxing, and perhaps rather more than in Guiyang, though
cattle were important here, too. A plus, therefore, for Zunhua as regards
protein. This was heightened by the availability of soybeans, other beans and
peas generally, peanuts, and wheat. All of these, especially the ﬁrst, whose ﬂour
surpasses the average protein content in meat, have substantially more protein

318

Particularities

than rice which is the staple grain in the south. There were also hens’
eggs seemingly commonly available, and a probably very small supply of
sheep’s milk.
There was a superabundance of fruits and nuts compared to Jiaxing, and
clearly a richer supply than in Guiyang, though this latter was also known for
its fruit trees. Hence some extra vitamin C. Vegetables were very varied,
ensuring a supply of most necessary minerals and vitamins. Techniques for
safeguarding them through the winter were well developed. There is no
reason, though, to think that Zunhua was better off as regards vegetables than
Jiaxing and Guiyang except, perhaps, for its access to wild vegetables and, in
addition, wild nut trees.
As regards a supply of calcium, which has been a point of relative weakness
in the Chinese diet in recent times, Zunhua had a good bulk source in soybean
ﬂour, and a very rich, if quantitatively limited, source in ﬁgs. Its cherries and
plums would also have helped. Hence a probable relative advantage.
Retinol, or vitamin A, and substances from which the body can manufacture retinol, has been another problem in China. Here Zunhua’s strength in
melons would have helped. Melons can contain on the order of 175 micrograms of retinol equivalent in every 100 grams of edible weight. Peaches,
plums, and cherries would have also been useful minor fruit sources. The main
standby in all three areas, however, would have been the dark green leaves of
vegetables. Lettuces, for example, can contain 290 micrograms of carotenes—
precursors of vitamin A—per 100 grams of edible weight.
It is important not to be too conﬁdent when comparing one diet with
another on the basis of the rough historical materials at our disposal. The
‘same’ foods can be signiﬁcantly different depending on precisely where they
come from, and how they are harvested and processed; and the human
organism can to some extent adapt to the deﬁciencies of a speciﬁc local diet.
Overall, though, the quality of the Zunhua diet seems likely to have been
rather better than that in Jiaxing or Guiyang, and the substantial environmental buffer of wild foods and wild animals would have acted to stabilize
supply.
We have the sketch of an explanation for the exceptional local longevity.

Perceptions

10
Nature as Revelation

Through more than three thousand years, the Chinese refashioned China.
They cleared the forests and the original vegetation cover, terraced its hillslopes, and partitioned its valley ﬂoors into ﬁelds. They diked, dammed, and
diverted its rivers and lakes. They hunted or domesticated its animals and
birds; or else destroyed their habitats as a by-product of the pursuit of
economic improvements. By late-imperial times there was little that could be
called ‘natural’ left untouched by this process of exploitation and adaptation.
At the same time there developed among the elite an artistic and philosophical attitude toward the landscape that saw it as the exempliﬁcation of the
workings of the deepest forces in the cosmos. As, not a momentary, but a
perpetually present and accessible revelation. The eye endowed with understanding could see in a landscape the self-realizing patterns of the Way, the
ever-renewed cycles of the complementary impulses driving the world’s
changes. It could divine the geomantic ﬁelds of force in protective mountains
and power-concentrating pools of water. It could perceive it as the serious
playground, so to speak, of the Immortals who were also at the same time its
constituents. Or as an embodiment of the Buddha whose spirit radiated,
detectably, through all phenomena.1
This vision had crystallized by the middle of the fourth century ce. Didactically expressed, and hence perhaps deﬁcient as poetry, its core components
may be found in a suite of verses by Wang Xizhi (321–79 ce), the foremost of
the circle associated with the Orchid Pavilion Mountain in what is today
Zhejiang province (on the boundary between the East and Southeast).2
A few terms need preliminary explanation. The ‘Great Patterns’ are the
hexagrams of the Book of Changes, the images whose sequences both deﬁne

322

Perceptions

and reveal the tendencies in the world. The term lı̌, namely ‘pattern-principle’,
occurs three times, and is rendered in a different way on each occasion as
‘implicate logic’, ‘norms’, and ‘the deep-lying structure’, respectively. In this
period it tended more often to be contrasted with shì, ‘phenomena’, rather
than qì ‘energy–substance–vitality’, as was to become standard later. It indicated the pattern deﬁning and controlling the distinctive way something
functioned.
The image of the cosmic craftsman appears implicitly in the reference to the
‘reshaping’ of matter; the term used applied originally to the working of clay.
It also appears explicitly as ‘the demiurge Change’. This latter is the Chinese
zaohua, who has already been mentioned in earlier chapters. He was a god-like
transformer rather than a creator in the strict sense, and somewhat abstract in
conception: more a force than a superhuman.
Note, too, how pattern-principles are said to be able to lodge for a moment
in the eye of someone looking at a landscape, who can watch them ‘unfold of
themselves’. Contemplating an expanse of scenery provided an intimacy with
the cosmos.
I
Gentle and numberless move the Great Patterns,
Revolving in cycles, unbounded, unceasing.
Such reshaping of matter’s not part of our craft,
Nor can we command them to come. Or to leave.
Where did they originate? At whose command?
— Self-born their fulﬁlment, from implicate logic.
Those who have minds, but lack understanding
Stumble onward, entangled in losses and proﬁts.
Best to let each encounter, then, occur just as it will.
If one roams without ﬁxed purpose, one’s meetings are propitious.
II
Spring ﬁrst sees the multitudes burgeon diversely,
As each one swells stirred by its innermost being.
Eyes raised, the horizon’s remotely discerned;
Eyes down, there’s the bank, past which water ﬂows green.
Vista silent and bright! Beyond limits of space.
Like guests lodged in my eyes, norms unfold of themselves.
Prodigious the deeds of the demiurge Change,
As dissimilar things blend in balanced effect.

323

Nature as Revelation

Countless are the musical pipes, and though of varying lengths,
We ﬁnd them all to be akin, not one of them ill met.3 . . . .
V
Substance unceasingly gels, then dissolves.
No start ever occurred to perfecting–decaying.
Not one instant does making of new objects stop;
And — when once gone — they can’t ﬂourish again.
A miraculous gift: to exist in time present.
Two nights in one house — and we’re like lees, or dust.
Unrealized hopes ﬁll us all with regret.
— Break free by inferring the deep-lying structure.
And if one’s words remain behind, what one is has not been broken.
The river is only transparent so long as it lingers nowhere.
People thus looked at landscape to achieve insight into the constant, internally
driven, impermanence of a universe without beginning or end, and to attain
the state of mind in which they could be carried along with it, unconcerned,
holding fast to nothing, unstopping and hence uncontaminated.
A paradox thus lay at the heart of Chinese attitudes to the landscape. On the
one hand it was seen, not as an image or reﬂection of some transcendent
being, but as a part of the supreme numinous power itself. Wisdom required
that one put oneself into its rhythms and be conscious of one’s inability to
reshape it. On the other hand the landscape was in fact tamed, transformed,
and exploited to a degree that had few parallels in the premodern world.
Certainly more than most of northwestern Europe, with the possible exception
of those regions of the Netherlands that depended on hydraulic systems.
Almost all European farming, for example, relied on rainfall, not irrigation,
the basis of so much of Chinese agriculture; and long European transport
canals, though brieﬂy important, were more modest than those in China, and
built much later, beginning in the sixteenth century.
This paradox shows that the relationship of a representation to a reality—
so far as we can understand the ﬁrst and reconstruct the second—may be
complex. Even, as is the case here, at least superﬁcially contradictory. What is
portrayed can at times be the opposite, in a sense, of what is. Behind all such
studies of perceptions of the environment there lurks a trap: that of assuming
that people’s actual behavior was on the whole necessarily in accord with the
ideas and feelings expressed in our sources. This problem was ﬁrst was established for ancient China in a combative, but brilliant, book by Heiner Roetz
which has been unduly neglected.4 Besides insisting on the existence of a wide

324

Perceptions

spectrum of views on nature in China, even in ancient times, he argues that “a
sympathetic feeling for nature, such as that in the Zhuangzi, was simply a reaction against the course being taken in an entirely opposite direction by reality
as it developed.”5 He notes that “in its polemic against the destructive consequences of civilization the Zhuangzi passionately takes the side of the
nonhuman world. One of the perpetually recurring motifs used to pick out the
subjugation of nature for human purposes is the tree. The way in which it is
processed into objects for human use is the characteristic illustration of the
loss of our innate nature.”6 He also, however, reminds us that “grief at the
destruction of nature is . . . never to be understood only as allegorical, but also
in its direct sense.”7 Real forests were really destroyed.
There is no simple and deﬁnitive way of resolving the dilemma posed by
Roetz: do our sources mainly reﬂect the dominant tendencies of an age, or are
they more often reactions, by far-seeing and sensitive thinkers, against these
dominant tendencies? And, if a mixture, where, and in what proportions? This
unresolved doubt will haunt our attempts at understanding much of the
translated material that follows in Perceptions.

Nature and the environment in Chinese poetry before
early medieval times
The representation of nature in archaic and early-imperial Chinese poetry is
a much-studied theme.8 Here all that is needed is a sketch to create a context
for what follows: poems touching on the environment down to early medieval
times.
The oldest of the traditional anthologies is the Scripture of Songs.9 The
poems or songs it contains were mostly composed between the ninth and the
seventh centuries bce, and describe life in the north. ‘Nature’ usually comes
on-stage as discrete objects, mostly birds, animals, insects, and plants. These
usually parallel in some way the human situation: thus the wild geese ﬂying
evoke the spectacle of gentlemen setting off on an expedition.10 More rarely
they contrast with it, as in the case of the bustards who can rest when the
singer cannot.11 A simple illustration of a parallel is the girl nervously waiting
to meet her husband-to-be:12
The katydid chirps,
The grasshopper jumps.
Not having seen him,
My anxious heart thuds.

Nature as Revelation

325

Slightly more elaborate is the contrast effect in the song of the wife whose
husband has gone away on campaign but has not come back. The animals and
domestic birds return in the evening, but he does not:13
My lord is gone away to war,
Many a day now, many a moon.
— Shall we two ever meet once more?
Our fowls have nested on their roost,
The sun is down,
Our sheep and cattle gathered in.
My lord away to war is gone.
Nor thirst nor hunger be on him!
These parallels are emotive but usually objective. Only occasionally is a moral
lesson drawn from nature:14
Chopped tree trunks resound to the axes.
The birds echo back what they’re hearing.
They ﬂee from the deep-hidden valleys
And resort to the towering trees,
Where they call and call — we are here!
And search for the cries of companions.
Those birds deserve our attention:
If even they search for the voices of friends,
How much more so then, surely, should men!
One method of building up to a climax is to vary one word in an otherwise
identical line which is repeated in a sequence of stanzas. One song follows the
making of cartwheels from the cutting of the wood, to the trimming of
the spokes, to the shaping of the rims. As it does so, the ﬂow of the nearby
river changes its pattern, ending with rotating eddies.15 A sort of sympathetic
resonance. In another song, a girl waits for a faithless lover as millet grows
from sprouts to awns to full ears, and her feelings alter from unease to an
aching dullness to suffocation.16 The plant acts as the clock of the seasons
and the heart.
Weather can both mirror and create a mood. The song of the soldiers who
have spent weary months far from home, on guard against the Xianyun
barbarians, ends:17
When we set off — now long ago,
Green, with many leaves, were the willows.
Today, when we are coming home,
The ﬂakes of snow are falling thickly.

326

Perceptions

Slowly we travel along the road.
Stomachs are empty, throats are parched.
Our minds, too, wounded. No one knows
The anguish that destroys our hearts.
There is no sense, though, of the natural environment being a naturally or
morally coherent system except perhaps ﬂeetingly in some of the poems on
disasters. These convey the feeling that the power governing the world has
turned against the people, causing epidemics, ﬂoods, famines, baleful portents,
and droughts. The assumption is that this is, or should be, punishment for the
misdeeds of the rulers but sometimes it is seen as indiscriminate:18
Majestic Heaven is awesome, swift,
It frames not Its plans nor carefully thinks. . . .
Even those free of any guilt
Fall everywhere in the abyss.
Bewilderment was sometimes the understandable response:19
Drought overwhelms us.
Stream beds and mountains, dry and lifeless.
Under the Drought Fiend’s ﬁerce oppression
All seems aﬂame, all seems on ﬁre.
Our minds ﬂee the menace of the heat.
Our hearts are burning with their fears.
Our long-dead rulers pay no heed.
O God Supreme, Majestic Heaven,
Why do you make us cower in terror?
The second anthology of preimperial times is The Songs of the South, or,
more literally, The Compositions of Chu, Chu being the great late-archaic state
in the central Yangzi valley.20 Its core works probably date from the fourth
century bce; some of the items are a number of centuries later. Several differences are at once noticeable in the way that nature is experienced and evoked.
The ﬁrst is that the poets—Qu Yuan, and others, mostly anonymous21—
have mastered the art of handling complex, integrated scenes, and use these as
vehicles to convey emotion. The closing lines of “The Mountain Goddess” are
an example.22 Note that ‘smirr’ is a vernacular west-Scottish word for drizzling
rain so ﬁne that it is almost a mist. The ‘lady’ is the goddess herself.
Smirring of rain. Drum-rolling thunder.
Gibbons calling at night. The soft babbling of monkeys.

Nature as Revelation

327

The soughing of branches. Wind blown in gusts.
My lone thoughts on my lady. How I grieve we are sundered.
The word rendered here by ‘monkeys’ would be more exactly translated as
‘black gibbons’.
Speciﬁc landscapes are sometimes described. “Crossing the Yangzi” contains
an account of traveling by a boat with a cabin up the Yuan River in what is
today western Hu'nan.23 Xupu is up a tributary of the Yuan. The area was
inhabited by peoples who did not speak the poet’s language.
Turning in to Xupu — I hesitate, then pause,
Confused and still unclear as to whither I am venturing.
Darkness endlessly extends throughout the depths of forest.
This is where black monkeys, and the gibbons, have their dwellings.
So lofty are the mountain tops that the sun passes hidden,
So ﬁlled with shadows the valley depths that squalls of rain are frequent,
Sleet showers so chaotic that no boundaries are visible,
Low clouds so thick amassed they seem to extend the eaves.
There is a ﬁrst glimmering here of conscious environmental sensitivity in the
intuition that darkness, and hence coolness, increases the likelihood of rain.
There is a new feature in many of these poems: magical journeys of the
spirit in inspiration or trance. Often the poet seems to take to the air, and a
panorama—a giddying mixture of the fantastic and the real—opens out below
him. As an example we may look at a few lines from “Grief at the Eddying
Wind.”24 This is a lament in which the writer ﬁnds relief from the frustrations
and corruptions of the human world through his vision of the immensity and
grandeur of the forces of nature. Kunlun was the magic world-mountain in the
west. Sometimes it was described as ‘the lower metropolis of God’, and the
home of the Queen Mother of the West. Those who ascended the Cold Wind
Mountain above it were said to become deathless.25 The Cavern of Winds,
where the winds gathered, was also said to be here. Mount Min, a real mountain in what is today Sichuan province, was thought to be the source of the
Yangzi.
Ascending among the loftiest peaks, to gain the topmost escarpments,
I dwell on the uttermost summit of the secondary rainbow’s arch.
My feet on the deep blue ﬁrmament, I mount up upon the main spectrum,
And before the briefest instant’s passed, my hand’s laid hold on Heaven.
I drink draughts of translucent dew, from the springs that go past me,
ﬂoating.

328

Perceptions

I rinse my throat with crystals of frost, congealed when the fogs have frozen.
I repose by the Cavern of Winds, to reﬁll with the breath of vitality,
Then, on a sudden — awake again — feel the tug of the heart’s
attachments.
I walk high on the Kunlun Mountain, to gaze down over the mists.
I lean back against Mount Min, so the Yangzi is clearly visible.
I withdraw in terror — like boulders grinding is the noise of its torrent
rushing.
I hear, too, the sound of its surges — like the clamor of quarrelsome
drums.
Leaping away in chaos, with no ordained regularity,
Undisciplined and confused, spreading over a vast expanse,
Waves tumble and crush themselves in the spate, leaving no traces behind
them,
Headlong as runaway horses, unstoppably weaving and winding.
The intoxication with both natural grandeur and the supernatural
combined with the exuberant inventiveness of the Chu poets in a multiplicity
of forms. They questioned the origins of the universe. They summoned forth
visions of the inhuman but visually gripping worlds of the dragon-haunted
ocean, the deadly jungles, the demon-infested deserts, and the ice-bound
north. And they conjured up dramatic performances of real or simulated
possession by spirits. An example of this last are the lines in a hymn spoken by
the ‘Sun God’, in fact by his impersonator.26 As he ﬁrst rises above the
dissolving darkness he declares:
To my shafts I yoke dragons. I ride on the thunders.
Bearing banners of cloud-wrack, shaking and ﬂuttering.
I sigh, I sigh deeply, as I start the path upward.
I look back with longing, my heart so reluctant.
Then, at the end of the hymn, the Sun God sets. Note that the ‘Wolf of the Sky’
was a baleful star that had dominion over invasion and pillage. It was also a
symbol for Chu’s deadly enemy to the northwest, the state of Qin. The ‘Bow’
stands for the ‘Bow and Arrow’, a constellation of nine stars that ruled over
defense against brigands.
My robes are dark clouds, my skirts rainbows bright.
My sunbeams I aim at the Wolf of the Sky.
Then I loose the Bow back and, struck, he falls dying.
So I lift up the Dipper, pour cinnamon wine!

Nature as Revelation

329

Tightly grasping the reins, I haste home from the heights.
To return to the east, I plunge deep into night.
Nature was magical.
The styles of verse pioneered in Chu led to the development of the fù, a
long, descriptive, and usually but not always unrhymed rhapsody with lines of
varying length. Poems in this style were ﬁrst written in Chu, and then
ﬂourished under the early empire. Subjects varied. They included such topics
as the wind, the imperial hunting grounds, and the capital cities. Though they
tend at times to become rhetorical catalogs, they can, at their best, achieve a
cold, artiﬁcial magniﬁcence. As an example, consider these lines written by
Mei Sheng (or ‘Cheng’) in the middle of the second century bce. They are
from his fù “Qi fa” and describe a tong tree.27 Though tong has several meanings, this is almost certainly a wutong or Firmiana simplex (formerly Sterculia
platanifolia), a straight-trunked deciduous species producing edible nuts,
normally from twenty to thirty feet in height, with long-stalked broad leaves,
roughly palm-shaped, and with hairs on their backs. As mentioned earlier,
myth held that it was the only tree on which a phoenix would alight. The
Dragon Gate gorge referred to here is most likely to be that on the Yi River, just
south of Luoyang in He'nan, but there were several others. The handan is said
to be a bird that sings before sunrise; I have rendered it here by ‘dawn-caller’,
since there is no scientiﬁc identiﬁcation.
Above Dragon Gate gorge, the wutong tree
Rises unbranched to a hundred feet.
Plate-fungi thick-clustered halfway up,
Its roots subdivided, writhing, and multiple.
Upward, thousands of fathoms, soar the peaks
As it looks down to gorges a thousand beneath.
The surging ﬂows and the counter-currents
Wind-agitated, swirl round and buffet it.
In the wild gales of winter, and the spatter of hailstones,
It is beaten upon by the ﬂying snowﬂakes,
While in summer the lightnings and thunders shake it.
Mornings, orioles sing, and the dawn-callers chirp.
At dusk it’s a night-roost for off-course birds.
Overhead, the lone goose greets the rising sun.
At its foot, the quails chirrup, plaintively ﬂuttering.

330

Perceptions

An illustration of the passion for parallelism that dominated so much of
Chinese verse for so long.
Rhapsodic description of natural phenomena continued into the next millennium. In the third century ce, for example, Mu Hua produced a virtuoso fù
on the sea.28 Here are a few of its lines, freely rendered:
Rage-swollen ocean!
Waves foaming over, then rising, then ﬂoating
Till the next clash and pummel
When the breakers are lifting and spray scatters upward!
....
Needling summits and ranges ﬂy skyward
And then they collapse,
As if, in wild dance, the Five Peaks
Were pounding each other like mallets,
Chaotically spitting, or else sunk in gulfs, or amassing,
Piling up against rocks to disintegrate, swelling, successively crashing!
Whirlpools, hitting each other, are sucked down into cavernous maelstroms.
Huge swells in collision erupt — into fantasmagorical wave-forms.
This is not without its element of realism. Freak waves do result from the
encounter of two bodies of water moving in opposed directions, especially a
wave-train meeting a current.29 But it is a generalized, conceptual vision, and
should be contrasted with the speciﬁcity of Xie Lingyun’s description of
Hangzhou Bay translated in the next section.
Finally, in the century following the end of the early empire, by some
quantum jump in Chinese social mental processes, the totality of the actions
that constitute the being of the universe came to be directly perceived and experienced as a whole. It would of course be reasonable to argue that the founders
of philosophical Daoism, especially Zhuangzi, had reached this understanding
half a millennium earlier. The counter-argument—which is more a qualiﬁcation than a direct counter—is that this had achieved little or no expression in
the poetry or art of these intervening centuries, and was for most people a
ﬂeeting intuition, not yet cognitively crystallized. Now it was becoming so.
One marker of the change is the weaving of an old philosophical term,
‘being so of itself ’, the Chinese ziran, into the fabric of what seemed direct
perception and its expression in poetry. Becoming generalized, ‘being so of
itself ’ became close to what we would call ‘nature’. By ‘direct perception’ I mean
only that the consciousness of conceptual preconditioning had vanished: one
thought one just saw it.

Nature as Revelation

331

‘Nature’ in this broad sense had a spectrum of meanings, as it does in
English. Here are two couplets by Sun Chu (?233–93 ce), from two different
works, that use it for that which bestows their inherent character on things and
phenomena:30
I
Here grow the elegant grasses that, by nature, are their own selves,
Near the Magic Pool fed with the waters that sands and gravels have
cleansed.
II
These ﬂowers become the ﬂowers they are — chrysanthemums sweetly
scented —
By incorporating within themselves nature’s pure, subtle, germinal
elements.
The Magic Pool was the famous ﬁsh pond of King Wen of the Zhou dynasty
and may have had overtones of fecundity and prosperity.
One implication of the use of ‘nature’ in this sense is that ‘natural’ processes
are those with which human beings have not interfered. Guo Pu (276–324 ce)
says:31
Using no farmer’s art, I broadcast the bearded grains,
And pluck up the ﬁnest rice that nature has propagated.
The distinction between human beings and nature was only relative, of course.
People were also a part of nature, and it could have lessons for them. In the
fourth century, Su Yan wrote a rhapsody on the ﬂoating great duckweed
(Spirodela polyrhiza) that contains the lines below.32 The term I have rendered
as ‘Ultimate Logic’ may also be translated as ‘perfect pattern-principle’.
It always lets itself go, till it meets with some other thing,
Taking encounters as they come. It is not in its nature to cling.
A helpless weed. Yet one that, however unconscious,
Conjoins in the dark with itself the Ultimate Logic.
People should be duckweed.
Above all, nature was a source of enlightenment. This emerges from a careful
reading of a travel poem written by Yinzhong Wen, who died in 407 ce.33 It is
full of allusions to Daoist and other metaphysical concepts.
Season follows after season, like the scales upon a ﬁsh,
The transformations of patterns that are all of them consistent,
But only the clarity of light from the sunshine in the fall
Inspires in us an elation exalted as well as ﬂawless.

332

Perceptions

The force of life in the landscape is brilliant and yet remote,
The atmosphere, and beings in it, by their nature intense and cold.
A pipe of reeds sets resonating the hidden Tones of the Months.
The mournful gorge speaks, gently, of the Insubstantial Gulf.
The time of the year is chill, with no trace of its former lushness.
At dawn the leaves come drifting down, contentedly unreluctant.
What criterion will distinguish the tough from the easily crushed,
Here for a ﬂeeting instant lodged in the pine tree and the mushroom?
In the early morning calm, the man of talent feels humbled,
And ﬁlled with respectful awe at this journey beyond the dust.
‘Pattern’ refers to ‘pattern-principles’, the shaping templates of the universe.
‘Clarity’, which also signiﬁes ‘purity’, hints at the self-cleansing undertaken by
the adept. ‘Life force’ is qì, also variously translated as ‘aether’, ‘pneuma’, and
‘energy–matter’. It is the term that was later used for the basic stuff of the
world. The ‘Tones of the Months’ are the twelve musically tuned breaths
thought to control the months and seasons; they were the focus of various
archaic rituals. The ‘pipe of reeds’ suggests Zhuangzi’s description, through the
mouth of one of his ﬁctional characters, of the workings of heaven and earth
as a sort of polyphonic pipe music. The ‘Insubstantial Gulf ’ is the Daoist void,
paced by immortals, and perhaps also the Buddhist idea of the empty unreality of all composite things. The pine tree symbolizes the Daoist’s quest for
immunity from physical deterioration, rather than see himself crumble away
like the fragile fungus. The ‘dust’ is the everyday world, whose contamination
the traveler has left behind, even if only momentarily.
Xie Lingyun slightly later sketched the outline of a philosophy based on the
idea that the ‘delighting heart’ or ‘responsive mind’—alternative translations
of the same key term—interacting aesthetically with the natural world, was the
means of achieving Buddhist enlightenment. He wrote a didactic quatrain to
express this:34
Feelings work through responsive delight to make beauty.
Obscure are phenomena. Who can discern them?
When this has been seen, objects no more concern one.
One has, once enlightened, what one pursued!
The line of thought seems to be that the emotions that create a delighted
response to the sensory world lead eventually to an intuitive sense of beauty
that transcends the original intellectually unanalyzable phenomena, and
enables the person with this sense to understand that behind the phenomena
there lies nothing permanent or stable, hence no ‘objects’. This is the path to

Nature as Revelation

333

enlightenment. Elsewhere he says that “responsive mind alone is the source of
innate insight.”35 And again, “delighting response once gone, who can see the
pattern-principles?”36
Landscape was more than landscape.
The intuition that it possessed a meaning perpetually present, but perpetually elusive, was crystallized in a celebrated anthology piece by Tao Yuanming,
an aristocratic hermit–poet who lived from 365 to 427 ce. This is the ﬁfth in
his twelve-part sequence “Quafﬁng Wine.” I have incorporated in the translation glosses on some of the implications that are not spelled out in the original text. The southern mountains were, for example, a traditional symbol of
immutability; here the reference may also suggest Mount Lu, the refuge of
recluses and monks, and located not far south of Tao’s property. Chrysanthemum wine was drunk to promote longevity, but drinking is not directly
mentioned, only the ﬂowers. The ﬂower heads could also just be tossed into
the wine. The phrase ‘timeless, unmoving, conception’ is a translation of zhen
yi, more literally ‘authentic intent’, but which echoes both zhen ren, the Daoist
immortal, and the Buddhist zhen xin, the mind that is undeluded, hence as
unchanging as the calm sea. There may also be a hint that one reunites with
the rest of the world only as life draws to its close.37
I have built myself a shack, within humankind’s domain
Yet free of the rattle and clatter that horses and carriages make.
“How is it possible,” you ask, “that you could have managed it so?”
When my heart is far away, this place — of itself — becomes remote.
Having picked, for tippling, chrysanthemums from beneath the eastern
hedge,
I gaze wistfully at the southern hills, distant and changeless forever.
The aethers from off the mountains reach a perfect balance at sunset,
And, as they wing back toward their homes, the birds keep each other
company.
A timeless, unmoving, conception lies hidden in these phenomena,
But just as one seeks to express it, the words are already forgotten.
He is conscious of something that can only be called, however contradictory it
may sound, an immanent transcendence.
Tao’s life represented several of the socio-literary patterns that lay behind this
phase in the development of landscape poetry.38 He was the ambitious descendant of a famous southern military family, and specialized in Confucian
learning, holding various ofﬁces both civil and military until he was twentyeight. Luckily for him, he was in mourning for his mother and thus out of the

334

Perceptions

immediate political hurly-burly, when one of the power-holders on whom he
was dependent launched a transitorily successful, but soon doomed, coup
d’état. Another with whom he had had close relations committed suicide as a
result of this coup. Tao at once withdrew to his estate at Xinyang in what is
modern Jiangxi province, and remained out of ofﬁce for the next thirteen years.
There was something of a fashion among the nobility at this time for a
conspicuously visible withdrawal from the world, and even a degree of competition for the most distinguished modesty and anonymity. Tao was a superlative
poet but also, like most of the others, a poseur. His mind, he said dwelt in “the
heights and the wetlands”:
I amount to less than a high-ﬂying bird, seen when gazing up at the
clouds.
I am nothing compared to a swimming ﬁsh, seen when, by a stream, I
glance down.
Birds and ﬁsh had a freedom that he was denied, but envied. He wrote of his
relief to be done with his life in the bureaucracy:
Too long, too long, was I within that cage!
But now, once more, have I returned to nature.
About a year later, he went back into the cage and accepted a post as a county
magistrate. Eighty days later, though, he resigned, observing that “I am incapable of bending at the waist to a rural nobody simply on account of ﬁve pecks
of rice.” This last was a reference to his ofﬁcial salary. The ‘rural nobody’ was
one of the local prefect’s deputies who was on his way to see him. Resignation
was motivated not by enlightenment, but by aristocratic snobbery.
During his retirement he constantly talked of his poverty. In so far as this
had any reality it was relative to other members of the aristocracy, and the
previous generations of his own family. On one occasion he described how,
when he came back to his estate, “my serfs came to welcome me, while the children waited by the doorway,” his farmers informed him about the ﬁelds, and
he hesitated, deliciously, over whether to go out in his covered carriage or his
“solitary boat.” It was a sumptuous penury.
His uncle, Tao Dan, had earlier done much the same in an even more
extravagant way. Dan had abstained from cereal foods, and striven to become
an immortal, while living on a large slice of the family fortune and looked after
by more than a hundred serfs. He may have felt that his chances in the ofﬁcial
world were none too good, as his father had died young. The de luxe hermit’s
life, the pursuit of enlightenment, and the cultivation of a love of nature are
perhaps best thought of as consolation prizes for members of the nobility who

Nature as Revelation

335

had come off second-best in the rat race of Court politics. Tao Yuanming’s
originality was to have made poetry out of it.

The ﬁrst coherent conception of an environment
The conception of an environment ﬁrst crystallized toward the end of the
fourth century ce. The intellectual chemistry required was the work of Xie
Lingyun, an aristocrat, estate owner, and poet who lived under the Liu Song
dynasty. He was born in 385 and died in 433. Though he was the author of
numerous beautiful lyric verses, his masterpiece—at least from the perspective
of the environmental historian—is his long descriptive poem called “Living in
the Hills.”39 This poem is the focus of the present section.
Why does it matter?
First, the poem is about a speciﬁc area, the edge of the mountains along the
southern shoreline of Hangzhou Bay, at 30° N, in what is now Shangyu county.
The descriptions should be recognizable from the accounts of Hangzhou Bay
in chapter 6, though the coastal plain was unencumbered by most of the
seawalls and water-control systems that have increasingly protected it since the
Tang dynasty, and the forests were full of wild animals long since vanished.
The climate was also colder then than now.
Second, though the language is intensiﬁed and enhanced, its content is in
most places realistic. Xie is not, like some of his predecessors, describing a
magic garden that symbolizes paradise. Nor is he letting himself go in a rhapsodic fantasy on a general theme, like Mu Hua in his prose-poem on the sea.
He writes of Shangyu as it once was. A real place that is also part of, and an
evocation of, the unbounded universe.
Experts having a familiarity with the tendency of most traditional Chinese
poetry to refer to the memorized classics, or familiar literary formulas, as
much as to the actual world, may be inclined to skepticism. I would offer three
arguments in response. (1) The overall character of the location, and many
details, is instantly recognizable to the environmental historian who knows the
nonliterary sources as well as the location. (2) The geographer Chen Qiaoyi,
who has studied the local forest history, regards the range of genera (where
identiﬁable) of trees and mammals listed by Xie as broadly appropriate.40 (3)
Francis Westbrook, who has made a complete ‘scholar’s translation’ of the
rhapsody, is convinced that it “is inspired directly by the real landscape.”41 The
most important place where he modiﬁes this judgment is with regard to the
sea: Xie, he says, “takes his sea-imagery into the realm of sheer hyperbole.”42
And this is due to a misunderstanding. As an expert in literature, he knows

336

Perceptions

little about Hangzhou Bay, and mistakenly thinks that the Qiantang River is
the Yangzi.43 In this particular case, the reality was hyperbolic. Westbrook’s
support on the key issue is important, as in other analyses he has meticulously
identiﬁed the presence of references to classics such the Scripture of Songs, the
Songs of the South, and the Book of Changes almost everywhere in Xie’s lyric
verses. This said, one has still to be alert to the possibility of lines that are probably derived only from literature. There are a number, and I point out most of
them where they occur.
Xie’s poem makes it clear that he had quite a subtle concept of the ‘environment’ as an interrelated complex of different but mutually interdependent
forms of life in varying habitats, even if he did not have a general term for it.
The reader today has difﬁculties because the poet’s world of thought is
embedded in an encyclopedia that is almost totally different from his or her
own. In fact, Xie even appended his own notes to successive sections of his
work, partly to explain his philosophy, and partly to clarify condensed allusions or unfamiliar local details. “Living in the Hills” was probably tough going
even for educated readers at the time it was written. The translation is tentative to an exceptional degree.44
Third, the poem is a guide to understanding Chinese attitudes toward
nature and the environment in later times, when they are often less explicitly
formulated, being taken for granted after so many centuries. Most important
of all, there was in Xie’s mind no conﬂict between the excitement of what we
now call ‘development’, that is, the practical mastering of nature, and the spiritual inspiration to be drawn from contemplating nature, that is, grasping that
it is immeasurably greater than we are, and driven by processes that we can
only partly intuit or discover. He delighted in having his serfs fell ancient trees
and open new roadways through the wilderness. Anyone who has ever owned
a substantial expanse of relatively untouched land—a disappearing minority,
it is true—can probably feel a certain empathy with this inner urge. It would
be unreasonable of us to think him unreasonable in this regard. Only in
millennial hindsight has it become apparent with what imperceptible subtlety
improvement can transform itself into its contrary: destruction.
Fourth, Xie’s vision of the natural world in which his estates were located
had multiple dimensions, all of which need to be understood to make sense of
this vision’s epiphany. He places himself in the context of history—‘Chinese
history’ for us, just ‘history’ for him. The poem is in one respect propaganda
for himself: his withdrawal to the country, in large measure because of the
dangers of life at a Court where the factional balance of forces had turned
against him, is implicitly compared to the real or alleged retirement from
power of some of the greatest ﬁgures in Chinese history. Like him, they are said

Nature as Revelation

337

to have found politics lacking in personal fulﬁlment. He also contrasts his
estates with other, earlier, celebrated estates and gardens, always in his own
favor. He is continuing traditions, and, he hints, improving on them. The
natural world he calls into life is set in a speciﬁc and identiﬁable local geography, echoing with the resonance of ancient, evocative names. But, in this
terrain, everything is part of an interacting whole. This is why it may be called
an ‘environmental’ poem. Everything is interlinked: the rivers, the shifting bars
of offshore sand, the funnel-shaped estuary with its tidal bore, the human
ameliorations of nature in the form of irrigated ﬁelds and ditches for drainage,
the scattered lakes and islets, the water plants, medicinal herbs, bamboos and
trees, the ﬁsh, birds, and mountain animals, as also such human activities as
hunting, lopping timber, manufacturing paper, and cutting trackways and
erecting buildings. Around this composite whole he weaves an encompassing
dream of Buddhist enlightenment: the wisdom of the taboos on killing, the
merit to be won from releasing living creatures back into freedom, the creation
of places for preaching, and of monasteries and hermitages; also insights into
the illusory character of our lives, and the workings of outer phenomena and
inner pattern-principles, so often seemingly perverse and to our discomﬁture.
An environment in human perspective is not just biology, but also ideology.
At the same time we have to remember that he is, self-consciously, writing
in a literary tradition. “Living in the Hills” is a fù, a form that carries with it the
expectation of baroque exaggeration, contrasts and parallels, and celebratory
catalogs. Even when he says that he is seeking simplicity, we are entitled to be
respectfully skeptical.
The translation that follows presents about two-thirds of the poem, and
portions of the original notes, with some explanatory comments before most of
the sections. Details have in some places been moved from Xie’s glosses into the
main text for ease of reading. Only in a few places have I found it possible to
match the varying lengths of the lines of successive blocks, which give a subtly
shifting rhythm to the piece, and much of its acoustic vitality. Unlike most later
fù, “Living in the Hills” has rhymes, though not universally nor, apparently,
systematically. The use of vowel-rhymes in the translation is thus justiﬁable.
I have also subdivided the poem into larger parts, labeled with capital
roman numerals, to give an idea of its overall structure. The ﬁrst of these is a
prelude in which Xie justiﬁes his retirement, claims—by implication—an
exalted place in history, and engages in a certain measure of aristocratic oneupmanship. Preceding this is a short prose introduction:
In ancient times to be domiciled in a hollow place was called ‘making one’s
bed in a cave’. To reside in the hills in a house [as I do] is termed ‘living in
the hills’. To be among the groves in the countryside is described as ‘making

338

Perceptions

a garden in a village’. Dwelling in the suburbs is known as ‘being beside the
city wall’. The dissimilarities between these four modes can be inferred from
underlying principles.
If we are speaking of the heart and mind, there is actually no difference
between riding in the imperial carriage and living in retirement on the
northern bank of the Fen River [like the sage–emperor Yao, according to
the Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi]. If we turn to phenomena, though, then
living in the hills is well and truly different from being in the bazaars.
One’s frantic feelings turn to leisured calm, and one effortlessly follows the
inclinations of one’s own character, having the courage to pursue what gives
one pleasure.
I have composed a prose-poem on this matter. Yang Xiong [a lexicographer and poet who lived from 53 bce to 18 ce] remarked that “Poets, when
writing prose-poems, combine loveliness and observance of metrical rules.
Decoration and structure should be conjoined for beauty to reach perfection.” What I sing of on the present occasion is not capital cities, nor palaces
and belvederes, nor hunting expeditions, splendid to ears and eyes alike.
Rather I tell of the phenomena of mountains and countrysides, of grasses and
trees, of streams and boulders, and of cereals and husbandry. I lack the talent
of those in the past, but my heart has been set free into what is beyond the
everyday world. If I sing as the rules of writing direct, I may with effort
attain my aim. But the search for beauty is something far removed from my
intent. You who are reading this should set aside the gorgeous phrases of
Zhang Heng [who wrote the “Prose-Poem on the Two Capitals”] and Zuo
Si [who wrote the “Prose-Poem on the Three Capitals”], and seek the deep
meaning of Tai Tong [a cave-dwelling hermit of Later Han times] and Old
Hoaryhead [a legendary recluse who is said to have lived in a fox’s shape
with foxes, but could shift back to his original form]. You must strip away
the showy, and take hold of the unadorned. Only then may perchance it
happen that you touch its heart. The idea is the substance of which words
are the outer form; and in writing them one can never convey everything.
In your search for the meaning in these traces that I have left behind me, put
your conﬁdence in that which inspires in you a delighted response.
The poem is as follows:
I
Master Xie lay resting, unwell, on top of the mountain’s crest,
Reading his way through the documents the men of old had left,
And, since they corresponded with what he himself professed,
The thought set him gently laughing, and this is what he said:

Nature as Revelation

339

So, then, it’s the Way that matters.
Things are but insubstantial.
Since the patterns will always continue,
Events may fade in oblivion.
The present can not be altered. Neither can what is now gone.
Both stuff and surface appearance maintain their regular constancies.
His sacred thatched hut could never afford a true home for the Yellow
Emperor,
Nor the crossroads palace give sage–king Yao what he found a congenial
dwelling.
The former followed his deepest desires when he died beside Tripod Lake,
While the latter retired to the Fen’s north shore in emotional exaltation.
Zhang Liang, once a warrior, changed his diet to grain-free macrobiotics,
Wishing to follow Immortal Red Pine, and range in the distant beyond.
I commend Fan Li who, revenged on Wu, let his oar-blades strike the
waves,
Having vainly urged his comrade Wen Zhong to ﬂee imminent death and
escape.
He judged that his person and name’s renown might exist in different
domains:
Fame weighed less in the balance than everyday life, so he saw no cause to
remain.
What’s to do? Since few paths now exist on which my hounds can hunt
hares.
And from where come the tracks whence, once more, I can hear the lament
of the cranes?
Fan Li was a man of Wu in the age of the Springs and Autumns. Judging that
he had been insulted by its ruler, he fought for more than twenty years to help
the ruler of Yue destroy his own former country. Victory won, he left by the
inland waterways for Qi in the north, where he changed his name, but then,
without intending it, became famous again. He therefore departed once more,
and altered his name a further time. The last line but one refers to the Li Si, the
ruthless and innovative prime minister of the First Emperor. When, under
the Second Emperor, he was about to be executed as a result of the machinations of his rival, the eunuch Zhao Gao, he observed to his second son that he
would have liked once more to go out with him, leading their brown dogs to
hunt “the crafty hares,” but how, now, could this ever be possible? The last line

340

Perceptions

refers to a remark by Lu Ji, also from Wu, but who lived in the late third and
early fourth centuries ce. He was defeated while leading an army in the service
of the king of Chengdu. About to be put to death for alleged treachery, he
asked, rhetorically, if he would ever again hear the cry of the cranes from his
home in Huating by the mouth of the Yangzi. Xie makes the dark implications
in these allusions explicit in his notes. Presumably he was thinking of his own
political situation.
When people were domiciled in hollows, gales and rains caused them
grief,
A misfortune the sages abolished, by inventing rafters and eaves.
When the luster of mansion and palace was created by glittering jades,
The trend shifted. Unsullied hamlet gardens were the cynosures of their
age.
Yet best of all is entrusting one’s house to the hilly heights and the gullies,
Where, with luck, the ancient and recent combine, and life is free of
obstructions.
Though neither in marketplace, nor in Court, yet the chill and the hot are
in balance,
And, even though artiﬁcially built, both the gaudy and drab are absent.
As Xie says in his notes, “the hilly heights and gullies have a deeper Way in
them than the hamlet gardens, but [living there] is not being domiciled in
hollows [as in primitive times].” He is advocating a civilized wilderness.
Nor was he above a little posthumous competition with others who had also
in the past ‘lived in the hills’, and perhaps demonstrating his southerner’s subtler
sensitivity to geomancy. (Note, by the way, that, in the fourth line below, the ‘uo’
of ‘Luo’ has much the same sound as the ‘o’ in ‘property’. ‘Cwm’, read ‘coom’, in
the seventh line indicates a steep-sided valley closed off at one end.)
Zhongchang Tong, in days gone by, had a taste for speaking his mind
About the high mountains on his estate and the waters meandering by.
Ying Qu, in a letter to Cheng Wenxin, described the site of his property
As having Mount Mang on its northern edge, and southward the River
Luo.
But the lines of force in their landscapes were lopsided and unbalanced,
Lacking an all-round perfection, well-matched in every azimuth.
The secluded cwms in the Copper Hills
Where the Zhuo clan went to the limit, digging ores and lopping down
timber,
And Golden Valley, amidst whose beauties

Nature as Revelation

341

Master Shi roamed on sightseeing tours, while sating his ears with sweet
music,
Were mere geomorphic formations, where the vegetation grew dense,
And, if I may say so, phenomena different from my spatial ensemble for a
residence.
And as for the terrace where Mu’s daughter’s lover piped to the phoenix to
come,
Or the Tower of Clusters that Zhao ﬁrst built, and later Chu also
constructed,
Or Clouds and Dreams Marshes, where King Ling gazed about him, at
mountains, rivers, and lakes,
Or the fall at Viridian Hill in Huainan, where princes engaged in the chase,
Or the Zhang Canal that Count Wen had cut, in Wei, for irrigation,
Or the parkland of bamboos enfolded where the Qi winds round in a
bight,
Or the Forest of Oranges in Sichuan, or Wu’s garden upon the Long Island,
Though the prized glories of states whose forces were once reckoned a
thousand chariots,
In which of these could a hermit ﬁnd — a resting-place where he could
vanish?
What is more, if these hills, and streams, were still not all he might wish,
What sort of sense would it be for him to seek to make additions?
The Zhuo clan were originally metalworkers from the state of Zhao who were
moved by the Qin imperial government to Linqiong in Sichuan, where they
openly appropriated the mountain forests and probably worked both copper
and iron. Master Shi was Shi Chong (249–300), a rich and unprincipled ofﬁcial
of the third century ce, who was also a poet. He built himself a country villa
at Golden Valley on the north side of the Yellow River, and organized a celebrated prolonged party there during which poems were written by the guests.45
He was later executed as the result of a false decree issued at the urging of a
rival, then in the political ascendant, to whom he had refused to present a
desirable singing-girl. There is a hint, in the reference to music, that what we
love can kill us.
‘Mu’ was Duke Mu of Qin, long before this western state gave birth to the
ﬁrst imperial dynasty. His daughter and her lover are said to have vanished
when the phoenix ﬁnally responded to the latter’s panpipes. ‘Clusters’ had two
different senses: in Zhao, bringing the separate together, and, in Chu, an abundance of auspicious crops. Ling was the king of Chu, and the great marshes,
now long since dried up, lay around the middle reaches of the Yangzi River (see

342

Perceptions

pages 50–2). On the last two lines, Xie observes in his notes that we have to
accept the landscapes that the topography gives us.
The second part of the poem, which is relatively brief, describes the origin of
the Xie family’s country estate. The ﬁrst section refers to Xie’s grandfather, Xie
Xuan, though we only know this from the poet’s own notes.46 Xuan had been a
successful general but retired from Court politics to “avoid the disorderly
behavior of those around the Throne.”
II
I observed his far-reaching perception adapt — to the trends of the times,
as they shifted,
In control, though the stirrings of change were shackled, and true
principle-pattern invisible.
The twilight of life his apologia, he came home to rest in tranquillity.
Celebration of his distinguished deeds he bequeathed to the stone
inscriptions.
Qu Yuan, he thought, showed his limitations when he drowned himself in
the river,
Though Yue Yi who ﬂed Yan, when maligned, aroused his pitying sympathy.
But it was nature — numinous, beautiful — for which he felt true afﬁnity,
And in settling secure here, above the world, he attained to his ambition.
So in some measure Lingyun’s response to the environment could be said to
have been inherited, though it seems that he can have hardly known his grandfather directly.47
Qu Yuan of the state of Chu in the third century bce was probably ancient
China’s most famous poet. He is traditionally believed to have drowned himself
in despair that his ruler would not listen to his counsel. Yue Yi of Wei and then
Yan was the commander who successfully led the allied armies of Yan, Zhao,
Chu, Han, and Wei against the state of Qi. When the king of Yan who had
appointed him passed away, his successor turned against Yue, who ﬂed, in fear
of his life, to the state of Zhao, though the breach was later mended.
In his note on the end of this section Xie comments that “the planning and
starting of work on the hills and streams were in fact based on this,” that is, on
his grandfather’s aims for his estate during his retirement. Intervention in
nature was the family style.
In the ﬁnal section of this part, Xie comments on his own psychology. The
language is at times opaque, and what is said seems to reveal an idiosyncratic
mixture of deference, hedonism, self-deprecation, despair, and a kind of optimistic and arrogant enlightenment. It is thus hard to be certain whether or not

343

Nature as Revelation

the translation has captured the appropriate sense of the original. By way of
preliminary explanations, note that Ban Si, who lived in the Han dynasty, was
a devotee of the Daoist masters Laozi and Zhuangzi. He believed, approvingly,
that they had “cut themselves off from the sages and abandoned knowledge.”
Shang Fu was a long-lived minister who served the ﬁrst three rulers of the
Zhou dynasty. The two lines before the last seem to hint hazily at the famous
saying of Laozi that “the greatest skill is like clumsiness,” and at the chapter in
the Zhuangzi called “Knowledge Travels North,” describing Knowledge’s futile
pilgrimage in pursuit of understanding, since those who knew either couldn’t,
or wouldn’t, tell him.
I revere the guidance wise men have left, behind them, from times now
past,
But I scrutinize, too, at a lower level, what suits my mood and my
character.
We were endowed with our modest-sized bodies for savoring calm and
happiness,
And must keep our inner selves prepared to snatch any opportune chance.
It shames me Ban Si, unstained by this world, could become enlightened
so fast.
That Shang Fu persevered to extreme old age makes me mortiﬁed I am
inadequate.
Senility threatens me. So, too, does sickness. A pretty pair of companions!
I’m resolved to make use of ineptitude, so that my life circles backward,
Relinquishing ordinary existence and its quest for understanding,
To live by the hillsides and the streams, immersed in an empty clarity.
After these prologs we move on to the geographical descriptions. The landscape some ﬁve or six thousand years before Xie’s time had been a submerged
coastline, in which hills emerged as islands from a shallow coastal sea perhaps
four meters higher than it is today. As the sea receded it left behind a plain of
sediments between these hills, dotted with shallow vestigial lakes, while the
coast remained a tidal salt marsh. Efforts to build a seawall began before midTang times, but it is not clear how long before, and it is likely that in Xie’s day
such a wall did not yet exist.48 Xie was understandably preoccupied with water.
III
As to my estate’s location —
Streams lie to its east. To the west are lacustrine basins.
One journeys past islands here, then returns via sandy spits,
One’s shoulders turned on the heights behind, as one faces out to the hills,

344

Perceptions

With impasses blocking off the east, while the west slopes away in
declivities.
In its bosom the inﬂowing–outﬂowing waters are all of them held fast.
The hills encircle us around, with a gently moving ambling.
Everywhere there are interconnected, and unpredictable, switchbacks.
Or else there are vertical ﬂanks. Or ﬂat and level expanses.
He then moves round the four points of the compass to survey the nearby
scenery. The names of the small-scale local features he mentions seem long
since to have been forgotten. Note that ‘beck’, in what follows, is an English
Lake District term for a small stream.
IV
Eastward, nearby, are ﬁelds high up. The lakes are lower down.
Gorges extend to the west. The vales lie off to the south.
There runs the Rockbound Trench, and the Spillway Through The
Stones.
So, too, the Whetstone Of Grief, whose bamboos are the color of gold.
Down their unfathomable descents, the becks leap forth into ﬂight,
And along the footslopes of countless hills where trellis-laced shrubs
grow high
They pour out their sources into the river disappearing on the horizon,
Or distribute their water from deep-sunk springs into irrigation close by.
At this early epoch the majority of the ﬁelds were high up to exploit the hillfoot alluvial fans laid down where the velocity of the water off the hills slowed
down, and then drained into the lakes below, such as Mirror Lake. In a later
age, as the coastal plain was diked and the soil cleaned of salt, the lakes were to
become reservoirs for newly opened ﬁelds now lying below them. In Xie’s day,
though, these techniques were only in their infancy. They were, centuries later,
when exported north, to transform the Yangzi delta.
Note that ‘anastomotic’ in the next section is a technical term from geomorphology and medicine for channels and tubes that have multiple intercommunicating openings.
Southward, still close at hand, there lies the Twin Streams’ conﬂuence
Enfolding the Triple Islands composed of sediment deposits.
Inside then outside each other are the shifting courses they follow,
Mountain waters that part and join, endlessly anastomotic.
A crag that seems about to crash overhangs the steep east ﬂank.
Huts serried, where once a city stood, cling beside the western path.

Nature as Revelation

345

The brook dashes against the blue-green woods, and waves from the
impact swash back,
While ripples — response to the current’s contact — reﬂect off shoals of
white sand.
The landscape was mobile and forever altering itself. In his notes, Xie remarks
that passers-by were terriﬁed by the sight of this rock that looked on the point
of falling into the river below.
We omit the opening lines of the section on the nearby view to the west and
continue with its conclusion:
Along the shore of the tidal inlet, bamboos cast their shadows of green.
Reﬂections of rockwalls, in the torrent, ﬂash with a reddish gleam.
Darkness consolidates after the moon sinks hidden behind the peaks,
And, their branches loud with singing, it seems — as if wind stirred in
the trees.
In his commentary, Xie says that “when birds gather on the branches singing,
then one refers to this as ‘wind’.” The Chinese word for ‘wind’ (feng) can
also have the meanings of ‘air’ or ‘tune’ and of ‘local atmosphere’ or ‘customs’.
There is thus something of a second sense hinted at: “as if folk music stirred
in the trees.”
The following section contains a word (li) that appears in no dictionary.
It is most likely from a now-forgotten local dialect, and quite possibly, like
some place-names in the area, is of Yue, not Han Chinese, origin. Xie glosses it
as ‘long stream’, and I have rendered it here by the relatively unusual term
‘ﬂume’ to ﬂag this feature. The theme in the ﬁrst quatrain is ‘two-in-one and
one-in-two’.
The pair of connected Shaman Lakes lies nearby to the north,
Linked by the Inner and Outer Flumes to form one body of water,
But Transverse Mountain and Everstone Hill have fully separate forms,
And distinctive landmarks are Circular Peak and the Summit of Good
Fortune.
Water is drawn, through circuitous channels, from the Renovated
Reservoir,
Spewing forth, bubbling, as from a spring, agitated and plentiful.
Checked under the mountains’ salients, it eddies back, forming wetlands,
But, rushing over the pebbled shallows, it cuts out a bed for itself.
Xie turns next to more distant prospects; and more familiar place names
come on stage. He opens with a roll call of mountains associated with Daoism.

346

Perceptions

Celestial Terrace is north of the city of Taizhou on the east coast. Sun Chuo
(314–71 ce) wrote a famous prose-poem on its ascent, full of Daoist and
Buddhist references. He mentions crossing the Oak Tree Stream or Oak Tree
Gorge that also appears in Xie’s poem, though in Xie’s case it seems a more
serious barrier. At the northern end of the Terrace was the Bridge of Rock,
believed to be used by immortals to travel back and forth, but too difﬁcult, like
the gorge, according to Xie’s notes on his own work, for ordinary human
beings to use any more. Squarestone and Four Brightnesses, which is near
Ningbo, both had natural stone ‘windows’ on all sides. The ‘brightnesses’ were
the sun, moon, stars, and planets. Majestic Peace, on the border of Yuyao and
Shangyu counties, was shaped like an umbrella, which also gave it an alternative name. The ‘tong’ tree referred to was probably a Paulownia or a Firmiana
simplex, not the oil-bearing tong (Aleurites fordii or montana). The apocryphal
scriptures Xie alludes to toward the end are the bogus additions made in the
ﬁrst centuries of the present era to the Confucian canon. Xie implies that
nature itself was another, different, scripture.
V
Away in the distance, to the east,
Rise Celestial Terrace, and Tong-and-Cedar,
With Squarestone, and Majestic Peace,
The Four Brightnesses, the Twin Leeks,
The Garlic Flower, and Five Ao Peaks.
Exemplars of numinous powers, unrecorded in the apocrypha,
They attest that auspicious magic echoes back in our matching responses.
Those having their favor can travel across the Bridge of Rocks’ lichens and
mosses,
And leap clear above the Oak Tree Gorge’s tortuous sinuosities.
In other words, they can become immortals.
A landscape like this was not mere prettiness, nor inspirational only in a
general way. Even less was it solely an arena for predictable, or at least familiar,
natural processes. It was magically alive, and this life had speciﬁc, identiﬁed,
foci. We do not resonate to their names, being almost unaware of their history,
but it is important to recognize that Xie’s readers must have reacted. When the
stories are not well known, he supplies details in his notes. Thus, of the Five Ao
Peaks mentioned above, he says “each one of these ao [bay-like recesses]
belonged respectively to the Daoist adept Tanji, and Messrs Cai, Chi, Xie, and
Chen. They all gave each other mutual help, and these too are wonderful places.”
He underlines the point with the phrase I have just put in italics: none of the
mountains in the roll call is ordinary.

Nature as Revelation

347

More mountains follow, again with evocative names. Then comes a realistic
account of the difﬁculties of moving around in this swampy terrain, and
through what he himself in his notes calls “the dense woods” that lined the
river banks “in every place.”
Needles of Pine and Perching Rooster rise far away to the south,
As do the Landslide of Stones, and the summit of sage–king Yao.
Mounts Tu and Foursome confront each other across the county
boundary.
White Pinnacle stands in its own domain, separate from Meng
Mountain.
If I trace a tributary to its source, then turn around to come home,
I grow bewildered, no longer discerning the way I ought to be going.
Uphill, the heights are impassable. I am caged, and the cage covered
over.
Downstream I sink in a morass, as my struggles make me soaked.
In Xie’s commentary he tells us that Daoist adept Tanji lived at Meng Mountain, where he had “ﬁelds cleared of weeds by burning for the growing of taro
and yams.” There were “limpid streams and an abundance of bamboos.” Of
course these remarks are designed to evoke a primitive Daoist simplicity: ﬁrefarming, not irrigation; edible roots, not cereals. Even allowing for this, the land
that appears in these descriptive phrases bears only little relation, its general
location apart, to the stripped away, densely populated, feverishly industrializing, concreted and polluted countryside crisscrossed by overhead electric
wires, and chugging or rushing vehicles, that one meets with today. Reﬂection
suggests that it was also markedly different from its successor even a thousand
years later, toward the end of the Chinese Middle Ages. The population then
would have already become twenty or more times greater than in Xie’s or Tanji’s
time, the sea excluded, the catchment rivers fully organized for productive
purposes, and most of the original woods cut. If there is a common characteristic that lasted through all these years, it is probably that of the omnipresence
of water, of the awareness of living at most a few meters above the level of
the highest tides.
The text of the section that follows, on the distant prospect westward, has
been lost. We therefore conclude this part of the poem by looking north,
toward the Qiantang River emptying from west to east into Hangzhou Bay.
This description is a recognizable portrayal of one of the world’s great
macrotidal estuaries, full of shifting sand banks, and famous for its tidal bore.49
The distinctive rotation of the tides around the bay, coming in at the northeast
and leaving by the southeast, observable today, seems from Xie’s lines to have

348

Perceptions

been broadly similar more than a millennium-and-a-half ago, even though the
coastal geometry has considerably altered since then.
Far to the north the long river ﬂows, seabound and homeward, forever,
Where the ocean, till it sinks from our sight, spreads out in its immensity,
While separate sediment-shoals pile up, as on ﬁlaments ﬁnely stretched,
And hummocked sandbanks interconnect in a loosely woven texture.
Mountains, haphazard in all directions, deploy their defensive shelter.
Water-gyres, plunging into the depths, clash in their circling complexities.
Sweeping away to the east — stretches uninterrupted emptiness.
To the horizon, the wind-swept waves join together and part irregularly.
...
Where the coast is high, one can guess that, below, the water drops many
fathoms,
And, by reading the patterns of islets, know the location of the shallows.
When the huge surges reach their full, they cover the Ceng Rocks over,
But when, dissipated, the swell sinks low, deep sandbars lie exposed.
If gales gust more ﬁercely than before, and the breakers’ crests rear up,
Then the water gains position-power from its speed and its abundance.
At the new and the full moon, every year, in the springtime and the
autumn,
The tides rise up to their maximum, and the waves froth tumultuously.
The terror-spreading billows are towering in their arrogance.
They shoot forth like spurts of lightning, or slump ﬂat with a thunderous
crashing.
Foam ﬂows on the sea-surface, driven by wind, or leaps aloft ﬂying and
spattering.
Surmounting an abrupt embankment, the sea rushes up the escarpment.
When it meets the river current head on, it brings it under its mastery.
It starts by rapidly circling around, as it mounts to the skies above,
But ends by turning itself upside down, so one glimpses the bed of its
gulf.
Intoxicated by this vision, Chu’s heir-apparent was healed,
And the God of the Yellow River shamed when confronting the God of
the Sea.
There are two literary references in the concluding lines. According to Xie’s
notes, an heir-apparent to the state of Chu, one Chu Er, was said by Mei Sheng

Nature as Revelation

349

(the Han-dynasty rhetorician who wrote the prose-poem on the tong tree
quoted on page 329) to have been cured of a sickness by a visitor from the state
of Wu. The cure was holding up to him a vision of the waves on the sea in the
fall. The last line refers to the chapter “Autumn Floods” in the Zhuangzi. The
God of the Yellow River is pleased with himself and his powers, until he
reaches the sea, and discovers his relative insigniﬁcance in comparison with its
inexhaustible immensity.
As to the science, it should be noted that I have supplied the word ‘tides’ on
the basis of the reference to the phases of the moon. We can also be fascinated,
so long as we are not too much impressed, by the poet’s intuition that the
‘position-power’ of the water—or in modern, but of course historically
misleading, parlance, its momentum and energy—is connected in some way
to what we would now term its velocity and its mass.
We now turn to Xie’s house and its estate. The descriptions evoke the halfsensed contrasts and ﬂeeting paradoxes that the poet’s mind intuits in the
landscape.
VI
Not far away is the site of the place where they lived in times now past.
A manor house rose there once. Today, it’s turned into a garden.
Hibiscus, still, lift themselves aloft, and the small-seeded elms with white
bark.
The foundations, as ever, still exist. Likewise the well, with its shaft.
Along the frontage, and at its back, the winding tracks encircle it.
Straight ﬁeld-paths, to its east and west, run upward and downward,
vertically.
It not only overlooks a gorge, but has a round pool in its purlieus.
It both holds a summit in its embrace, and boasts hills outside as its girdle.
Inquiring into my grandfather’s ﬁef, and its magical bewitchment,
Reveals the truth that, beyond any doubt, this property is inimitable.
Pairs of rafters forming triplicate sections, the crag-foot hall’s been rebuilt,
And a single roof-beam lodged in the cliff whose runoff below feeds the
river.
I ﬂing wide the doors, on the southern side, confronting the distant heights.
I open the window, facing east, to see ﬁelds of rice nearby.
These paddies, though adjacent to ridges, give me farmland in ample
supply.
Through the hillslopes, pillowed upon the stream, runs a path to the
burial site.

350

Perceptions

He is like any other owner of a new—or, in his case, renewed—house:
recounting the details of the structure, and enjoying the views. The triple units
of room-space are mentioned in his notes, and the “paired beams” may be
thought of as placed across the ceiling like the horizontal equivalents of the
two vertical folds in a triptych. He also comments that “what one can see,
looking out from these two halls, is almost all of equally high quality.” I have
used the special sense of ‘a path to a grave’ for the word qian, as the placing of
the hill above the water suggests a location suitable for tombs according to the
earth-magic ruling luck-giving burial in south China.
In the next section the ‘year-node divisions’ referred to are the twenty-four
solar periods into which the Chinese divided the calendar year.50 Each one had
approximately ﬁfteen days. The Chinese term translated ‘forecast’ can be
understood either as depending on some omen or presage about the weather
in the coming period, or else simply on sharp observation. The description of
farming that he gives suggests that sophisticated methods were already being
used for growing rice in this area around the end of the fourth century: he
mentions both an intricate irrigation system, and early- and late-ripening
varieties of the grain.
Dividing the ﬁelds, the pathways crisscross — in intersecting patterns;
At right angles, dikes along contours meet the walls protecting the
channels.
The current of water is led in ﬂowing, along a feeder canal.
Arteries spread it in random fashion. Rejoined ditches funnel it back.
Abundant, our harvest stands as thick as vegetation is plentiful,
Perfumed, nonglutinous, rice releasing the sweetness of its scent.
We bid the early-ripening ears of the summertime farewell,
To welcome the later autumnal crop as though coming to meet a guest.
We have, in addition to our paddies, dry raised ﬁelds and ridges
Where hemp-plants grow, and wheats, and beans and peas, and millets.
Observing the seasonal changes, we forecast each year-node division,
At some moments sowing the seeds, and, at others, gathering crops in.
The food we serve’s made of grain, combined with a rice-water drink.
Herdsmen and wood wardens aren’t required, nor those in crafts or business.
For living our lives, why insist on acquiring a vast store of riches?
Filling one’s stomach’s enough. — If one understands Pattern-Principle.
There is a hint here at the style of Chinese life in antiquity with the reference
to ‘rice-water’. The song “Da dong” in the Scripture of Songs contains the lines
about elegant but useless and self-indulgent high ofﬁcials:51

351

Nature as Revelation

Some of them will at times take wine,
But not water that’s an infusion of rice.
Xie’s own notes draw attention to an allusion to the Zhuangzi: “Xu You
said: ‘The tapir drinks from the Yellow River, but only enough for a bellyful’.”52
This quotation has also been used in our own times as an illustration of the
Daoist ideal of ecological delicacy: of living so lightly off the world that one’s
presence in it is barely felt. Xie adds that if one can “reduces one’s concern with
oneself and diminish one’s desires, then it sufﬁces one just to exist,” without
needing craftsmen, merchants, wood wardens to look after game, or herdsmen
to guard one’s ﬂocks. But, he adds, “without farmland there is no way one can
establish oneself.”
In commonsense terms, he is striking a philosophical pose. Pretending to
beliefs that, as a wealthy aristocrat, he in no way puts into practice in his own
life. Maybe one unstated purpose of proclaiming the attraction of an uncompromising archaic frugality was to imply the moral superiority of his precautionary self-imposed exile from active politics over the scheming and
maneuvering of those still involved. But—it may sometimes be necessary to be
skeptical of skepticism. My personal intuition is that he existed in at least a
double mental state: in some sense believing deeply in these Daoist ideals, even
at the same time as he constantly betrayed them. It is not an uncommon
human condition.
A few preliminary comments are needed for the last section in this part,
which describes the wetlands that lay almost on a level with the sea. Zizania
was a plant that grew in shallow water, and whose seeds could be harvested and
eaten not unlike those of grain. The ‘pool-girt tower’ is a reference to the
soaring Jiantai tower built in the middle of the Taiyi Lake that lay to the northwest of Chang'an (in the Northwest) during the Han dynasty. This lake
contained islands that were said to “resemble the mountains of the gods in the
sea.”53 The reﬂection of the moon is a Buddhist image for the unreality of the
sensory world.
Leaving the gardens behind us, we descend to the ﬁelds growing grain.
Then from the ﬁelds continue down, until we come to the lakes.
Here rivers have ﬂooded over their banks, causing spreading inundations,
And all, as far as the eye can see, is a watery domain.
I have dredged the pools and stream beds, yet they’re quiet and
undisturbed,
And cleared islets of the Zizania plants that created meandering curves.
In the early months of the year, warm springs gushed boisterously forth.
In the autumn, the chilly undulations speed swiftly by on their course.

352

Perceptions

Breezes arouse the ripples, besides islands covered with orchids.54
The upside-down sun is mirrored in mud, where pepper-fruits hang from
their stalks.
We ﬂy in our minds to the pool-girt tower, among man-made isles of
immortals.
We seize the happiness of illusion, as though grasping the moon in the
water.
Solar light, at dawn, elongates shadows; yet objects show up distinct.
The setting sun puts to sleep perfumed ﬂowers, yet their odors are still full
of vigor.
Looking back, I brood on ties of affection that, now, are forever broken.
For the future, I long for clouds of guests to call by for a passing moment.
His feelings shift back and forth. At one moment he feels an attachment to the
world of the senses and emotions, coupled with delight in an active involvement with it. Even improving on nature by dredging and tidying. At the next
he is aware of how easily we deceive ourselves with concocted fairylands, and
mistake perceptions—the sun seen shining upside-down in wet mud—for the
underlying realities. At the end he tacitly acknowledges that he, like all of us, is
a social animal that, however, enlightened, can never be wholly free of the need
for personal relations.
In the next part, we begin on the catalogs. These are sometimes felt to have
made the full text of “Living in the Hills” untranslatable as literature, and there
may be some truth in this opinion. At the same time they are a major part of
the justiﬁcation for regarding it as the ﬁrst environmental poem, and arguably
the greatest, in the Chinese tradition.
VII
As for the plants in the water’s depths —
Duckweeds and algae are there, together with mare’s-tail and sedges,
Reeds and rushes, and sweet-smelling sun-grass. So, too, are various
celeries,
Tall jian-reeds, Zizania, kernel-bearing, Marsilea with four-lobed foliage.
Likewise the white Artemisia.
Strainer-grasses and yellow, ﬂoating, Nymphoides, horned water chestnuts
and lilies.
Though the roll call of plants is complete, and each has its appropriate
elegance,
The lotus ﬂower, when open, is unique in its dazzling freshness.

Nature as Revelation

353

Its leaves lie seamlessly together, spreading further and further their green.
Its ﬂowers, holding their scarlet enclosed, tremble like ﬂags in a breeze.
It saddens me that the time is so brief during which that perfume’s
distilled.
That those faces, once they’ve touched on perfection, so pitifully easily
wither.
As always, once prodigal gifts are given, they are afterwards snatched away.
How empty the wreckage of the blooms that, a few moments past, were
fragrant!
The last four lines of this section are omitted. They show how water plants had
a long history as a topic in Chinese poetry. Xie was sensitive to the dual origin
of a poem: both personal experience mediated through previous literature,
and previous literature developed further on the basis of personal experience.
And to its social acceptance or rejection being shaped by similar forces. He is
engaging in these omitted lines, discreetly but unmistakably, in public relations for his own work.
He moves on to medicinal herbs. These remedies, real or imagined, were
part of the character of a locality. In his notes Xie comments on the Herbal of
the Divine Husbandman, a pharmacopeia edited in Later Han times, probably
on the basis of earlier materials: “These days one no longer relies on its [list of]
places where medicines are produced. They merely grow where the soil suits
them.” Observation could override authority. He adds that “this region
produces a very great number of materials for medicines.” There follow his
own glosses on most of the allusions made in the poem’s text. These include
the legendary discoverers of curative drugs, and the spelling out of such sets as
the Three Fruitstones, the Six Roots, the Five Flowers, and the Six Fruits. At the
end he talks mostly about plants that “belong to the immortals,” though all but
one, the last, seem to have been real enough.
His theme in the closing lines of this medicinal subsection is the exceptional
endurance that makes a long life, or even immortality, possible:
The hill Eupatoria bid fall farewell, showing forth in their shining colors.
Gardenia shrubs that grow beside snow are luxuriant, too, and supple.
Even after a myriad human lifetimes, the Tortuous Juniper ﬂourishes,
And a thousand years pass before we’re aware of the hidden ﬁr-tree fungus.
The corolla, on its green-hued stem, reﬂects back a brilliant crimson.
Dense colorless stamens cluster together, up on the purple twig.
It both brings aging to a halt, and enhances one’s mental quickness.
It can also expel a malevolent spirit, or provide the cure for a sickness.

354

Perceptions

The Eupatorium chinensis or lan-grass is one of the Compositae, which
include daisies, and chrysanthemums. It is described as a sweet-smelling
perennial, three or four feet high, that ﬂourishes in wild places in the hills. Its
pale purple tubular ﬂowers open only at the end of the fall. The ‘Tortuous
Juniper’ (a nonce translation) is Selaginella involvens, a tangled evergreen
shrub rather more than a foot in height, and used to produce a dye and a
medicine. The gardenia mentioned is Gardenia ﬂorida. The plant that is the
subject of the last four lines is not named, but is clearly a herb of immortality.
Stamens were sometimes eaten by Chinese hermits as a macrobiotic food.
The reference to snow is important. It is one of a number in the poem that
conﬁrm that the average annual temperature had fallen lower by the late
fourth century than it is today. The four lines that follow immediately below
as an illustration of this are taken out of sequence, and come from a part near
the end of the poem that I have otherwise not translated:
When grasses encounter the winter, their ﬂowers close up tight.
When the trees are shivering in frost, their green color withers and dies.
By those on the south-facing slopes, though it’s chill, the sunlight is still
absorbed;
But those on the northern ﬂanks keep their snow, even in times of warmth.
This seems to be referring to something that happens regularly, not momentary events. The mean temperature in Hangzhou for January, the coldest
month, is about 4° Celsius at the present day; and the lowest recent recorded
January has averaged 1° Celsius. Moments of snow and severe cold do occur,
but are brief.55
The section on bamboos, which follows, attempts a rough-and-ready taxonomic approach. In addition to differentiating the shapes of the leaves, and the
colors, of otherwise similar species, Xie also points to differences in the style
of growth. Thus delicate ‘streamside’ bamboos did not form dense groves,
whereas the heavier ‘stony-ground’ varieties did.
One Arrow Bamboo has broader leaves. The other one’s leaves are slender.
The four Bitter Bamboos are distinguished by color: green, white, purple,
and yellow.
One soil feeds the streamside variety, another the stony-ground species.
The ﬁrst, lightweight, we use for connecting ties. The second, heavy, for
beams.
Elongated they rise, and trembling — graceful-armed girls dancing
merrily,
Either growing in clustering thickets, or as multiple delicate stems.

Nature as Revelation

355

Moistened by dew when the sun goes down, they grow chilled and sunk
in the shadows.
When aroused by breezes at sunrise, they ﬁll with a pure vitality.
They constantly brush against the clouds with their feather-duster tops.
Where they overlook a jade-blue lake, their kingﬁsher turquoise is
prominent.
They disdain the Qin-Han Imperial Park, and Wei’s garden within the
Qi’s bend,
And conﬁrm the richness of bamboos that are our southeastern heritage.
This may also be read as referring to Mount Touchcloud (Shaoyun) in Wu,
and mentioned by the earlier poet Zuo Si, and to the Blue Ripples Lake
(Bilanghu), near Wuxing, to the northwest. Xie’s regional chauvinism is
evident, though not offensive. He ends by naming places where one should
walk and stay, and alludes to some historical tales, such as that on the origin
of bamboo ﬂutes.
Local trees form the coda to the survey of plants. Identifying them often
remains problematic, at times even at the level of the genus. ‘Southernwood’ is
Malachus nanmu. The Cudrania is triloba, a thorny tree whose leaves can be fed
to silkworms when mulberry leaves are in short supply. I have added a couple
of ampliﬁcations about the nature of two trees, the Broussonetia and Ailanthus.
As to its trees —
There are pines, cypresses, sandalwood, and oaks with chestnut leaves.
Also paulownias and elms, pian ‘laurels’ and southernwood ‘cedars’,
Dong, Cudrania, wild-growing mulberries, and the paper-source,
Broussonetia,
Catalpa, tamarisks, and Ailanthus, whose leaves stink but whose nuts can
be eaten.
Some are robust, and some soft. They have natures that greatly differ.
Their substances vary. Some are hardwoods. Others are fragile or brittle.
Some grow low down; some on heights. Some like loams; others soils of
low productivity.
They seek their particular requirements, having their own speciﬁcities.
Trunks, of two arms’-lengths girth, block the sight of the mountain
summits.
Perilous twigs rise a thousand fathoms, above the void of the gulfs.
They scale the mountainous ridges. They stand there, drawn up to full
height,
Or shelter deep in the torrent gorges, their lush foliage branching widely.

356

Perceptions

Down the lines of the lengthy valleys, boughs balance the slope with their
slant,
While clumps plunge their roots into boulder-heaps, and radiate twigs
intertangling.
Where sun–dazzle’s mirrored back from the streams, they seem to grow
even brighter,
And their aethers congeal in an atmosphere closing round us on every side.
Confronting the harshness of the cold, the trees are a fresh-tinted green.
Then imbibing the gentle warmth, they wax fat, and their fragrances are
sweet.
Next they bid farewell to their fallen leaves when autumn is nearly done,
And wait till the early days of spring with their stamens enclosed in their
buds.
This passage conveys the relative environmental abundance of these early
medieval times, a theme of chapter 7, and, by implication, the relative environmental poverty of those that followed. It also shows that Xie had a clear
conception of speciﬁc habitats, as he likewise did in the case of animals.
VIII
The world of plants has been described,
But animals are in such variety
— Swimming and cantering, leaping and soaring —
There’s no way to trace their complex origins.
One can only note what they look like, and consider their cries and calls,
To know if they belong in the hills, or by the ﬂowing waters,
Where, during the chilly weather and warmth, obedient to the seasons,
But without encouragement, or taboos, they seek for what they need.
‘Nature’, understood here in the sense that contrasts it with the human world,
was not shaped by social constraints. Observe, too, the ﬂicker of protoDarwinian insight. Xie says that the bafﬂing multiplicity of species (zhonglei)
makes it impossible for him to “root or source them” (gen-yuan), to give his
words a literal translation. His instinct, though, is to suspect that they must have
come from somewhere, not that there was a single creation, once and for all.
Fish come ﬁrst, with something of a confusion of names. Some of those he
mentions seem to correspond straightforwardly enough with ﬁshes that exist
in Zhejiang province today. Among freshwater ﬁshes living in lakes and local
networks of streams, we have the Siniperca spp. of which the broad-bellied
black-striped perch is representative, and Cyprinus carpio, the well-known
carp. Among ﬁsh that travel in fresh water, often spawning in the fast-ﬂowing

Nature as Revelation

357

upper reaches of the rivers, there is the toothless and laterally ﬂattened
Hypophtha imichthys moritrix. River-mouth ﬁsh provide the crucian carp,
regarded in folklore as the epitome of faithfulness and mutual help, as they
were always in pairs or groups. Hydraulic works seem recently to have
disrupted their breeding and they are now said to be extinct.56 Anadromous
ﬁsh that live in the sea, but breed in spring or summer up the rivers, include
the sea-perch (Lateolabrax spp.) and the Coilia nasus, a little ﬁsh only about
three to nine inches long. Fish living in shallow seas where the salinity is less
than that of the open ocean include the mullet (Mugil cephalus).
Some other identiﬁcations seem fairly reasonable. We can probably be
conﬁdent about the snake-ﬁsh that eats other ﬁsh, the snouted sturgeon and
the large sturgeon which is usually found near the sea. Slightly more problematic is the Pseudobagrus aurantiacus, a spiny, whiskered, and yellow-gilled ﬁsh,
though there is no support for the traditional belief that it could ﬂy. The same
holds for the freshwater triangular bream (Megalobrama terminalis), and the
Elopichthys bambusa, which is about three feet in length, and devours other
ﬁsh with insatiable voracity. The term zun has been applied to a variety of ﬁsh,
but my guess is that here it refers to another anadromous species, the
Oncorhynchus masou, that leaves the sea in the summer and goes up a river to
ﬁnd sands and gravels where the water is swift-ﬂowing and clear, and it can
breed. In general, we would expect the environment on the south side of
Hangzhou Bay in this period, saline tidal ﬂats before major seawalls had been
built, to have had a number of ﬁsh that either moved between saline and
nonsaline water, or preferred semisaline surroundings. For this reason the sha
is most probably the Acanthogobius ﬂavimanus, a ﬁsh only six or seven inches
long that likes semisaline water, rather than some sort of shark, which is the
dictionary alternative. Acanthogobius was traditionally believed to spit sand,
hence its name.57
Some species remain unidentiﬁable. These include the you and the xun.
‘Perch’, ‘tench’, and ‘bream’ in the translation that follows are merely approximate English equivalents.
As for the ﬁshes here, there are —
You, and perch, and snake-ﬁsh, pairs of faithful crucian carps,
Tench, bream, and ﬂattened Hypophtha, zun pursuing spawning urges,
Acanthogobius, ﬁne-scaled bream, snouted sturgeon, black-striped perch,
Whiskered, yellow-gilled Pseudobagrus, mullet, carp, and the greater
sturgeon.
Their colors associated together in a variegated medley,
Like multiple tapestries glittering, or bright-hued clouds in their freshness,

358

Perceptions

They nibble at the aquatic grasses, or disport themselves in the ripples,
Then drift, or ﬂoat along — through deep pools and shallow rifﬂes.
At times they agitate their gills, making the water quicken,
At others let their tails slap down, setting turbulent eddies spinning.
Sea-perch and Coilia both have their seasons when they swim up the tidal
inlets.
In the spate ﬂowing over the shallows, Elopichthys and xun — can make
their escape from the springs.
Xie’s catalog of birds lists wild geese, ﬁsh-hawks, herons, egrets, marabous,
bustards, pheasants, ducks, and domestic fowl. All, presumably, personally
observed. He expresses disdain in his notes for a Lu aristocrat in ancient times
who, on one occasion, “did not know the bird concerned, and considered it to
be a spirit.” A couple of entries do however sound purely literary.58 They might,
of course, be local or archaic terms whose real-life meaning has since been lost.
He continues:
Each sunrise, to pay respects at their court, the wild duck assemble.
When the season comes, the long-tailed pheasants meet on the mountain’s
crest.
He comments that the wild ducks “regularly wait till dawn before they take to
the air.” The traditional Chinese Court was held in the early hours of the
morning, when thinking was thought to be clearer. The line following refers to
an obscure passage in the Analects of Confucius.59 The idea underlying it is
probably that, in the natural world, everything depends on the season.
Migrations come next:
Seeking to live in a different place, seabirds will battle the wind.
Wild geese ﬂy south from the north, to be spared the winter’s chill.
When spring shoots make their appearance, however, they wing their way
back north,
But return as guests to our warmer regions, as soon as the frost has fallen.
Their clamorous cries, each succeeding the next, reach up to the Milky Way.
Night by night they sleep, a skein of companions, beside some river or lake.
Making heard their unsullied voices to those far below who are listening,
They bear Wang Zi, the fairyland sojourner, aloft on his heavenly visit.
Soaring on high, with beating pinions, they treat thoughts of return with
contempt.
When a valley below them mirrors their plumage, they feel delight in
themselves.

Nature as Revelation

359

Wang Zi, or Wang Zi Qiao, was the eldest son of King Ling of the Zhou
dynasty. He roamed about, playing the bamboo mouth organ, and, after
reﬁning himself for several decades under the guidance of a Daoist master,
rode off on a white crane. These verses are full of echoes from earlier literature,
to a greater extent than I have explicitly indicated. What is interesting is Xie’s
sense that birds have a certain intelligence, and even a degree of spiritual
insight and connection with the world of the numinous.
The mammals are more earthy:
There are gibbons high in the hills, laughing gibbons and wildcats and
badgers,
Wild dogs and wolves, and many-hued dogs, and bobcats marked yellow
and black.
On the lower slopes, brown-and-white bears, black bears, jackals, and
tigers,
Wild big-horned sheep, and timid muntjaks, plus jing-deer of massive
size.
Along the skyline, on the escarpment, some set shaking the soaring
branches,
Or cross the discontinuities that plunge down abruptly to canyons.
Some crouch at the bottom of a valley, and roar without ever stopping.
Others clamber up to the topmost boughs, where they cry with
heartbroken sorrow.
The ‘black bear’ is Ursus torquatus, and the ‘brown-and-white bear’ the larger
Ursus arctos. The identiﬁcations of the ‘wolf ’, ‘jackal’, and the ‘many-hued dog’
are approximations. Thus what I have rendered as the ‘wolf ’ Xie says in his
notes is “like the badger but larger, and belongs to the category of wolves.” The
‘muntjak’ is a type of deer.
All of these species, without exception, seem to have vanished by modern
times. The only wild animals that remain in the areas on each side of
Hangzhou Bay are some insectivores and rodents, plus some small carnivores
such as the yellow weasel, ferret–badger, leopard cat, and the small civet.60 It
would be a folly to overromanticize this ﬁfth-century world. Tigers and wolves
are dangerous. But human beings grew up for several hundreds of thousands
of years with animals all around them. A strange silence has fallen. An emptiness. One cannot help wondering what the long-term implications of this are
for the balance of our minds.
The economy was still in part based on hunting. Xie was unusual in wishing
to have nothing to do with this activity, Buddhism providing him with another
vision:61

360

Perceptions

Since I was young, I have not killed. Now my hair is white and I live in the
hills but delight in hunting and ﬁshing has vanished forever. Zhuangzi says:
“The tiger and wolf are animals with empathetic feeling for others. How can
it be that among them father and son are not mutually affectionate?”62 That
the world says that tigers and wolves are cruel is precisely because it thinks
of them as beasts. Human beings, however, have not become aware of their
own venomous harmfulness, yet talk of tigers and wolves as if they are
hateful in the extreme. If humans follow their desires, how will they ever
come to a limit?
Since I was of tender years, I have accepted the dharma. Thus I have been
able to avoid actions involving the taking of life. So it is that to some slight
degree I have understood the pattern-principle that the multitude of beings
love life. . . . It is more or less by taking advantage of this that I have been
able to enter onto the Way. Zhuangzi says:63 “If those who live by the sea have
contriving hearts, the seagulls will dance but not come down to land
[sensing a snare].” Now that I have no desire to harm them, we can each of
us [myself and the animals] take pleasure in the woods and pools.
The ‘contriving heart’ is the state of mind that one acquires, so Zhuangzi
implies with one of his stories, when one becomes overly preoccupied with
improving technology. The poem continues:
I have never upon these waters cast the angler’s hooked and baited line.
Nor meshes spread for snaring rabbits. Nor nets to entangle birds when
ﬂying.
The sandstone arrow-barbs lie unused. Likewise untouched the tethered
arrows.
Here, no webs are set for hares. No twigs interlaced for ﬁsh, as traps.
Empathy, and fellow-feeling, move even wolves’ hearts, and tigers’.
I remember too how I was vexed, from chasing my endless desires,
As I took my ﬁrst steps on the Way: my young strength was weak,
But enlightenment told me love for their lives applied to all beings equally.
Reach out to make contact with others. I have made this my guiding principle,
Since I am convinced that the Way can consist in nothing but this.
I take pleasure in caring for gulls and tiao, those white and slender ﬁsh,
And so by the tarns, and forest trees, my contriving mind falls still.
Some explanations of details are added in the notes.64 From the historian’s
point of view, it is a paradoxical moment. Xie is living, not uncomfortably, at
the end of a hunting culture when the expanded growing of cereals and
vegetables has made hunting obsolescent. Soon, in this region, obsolete. The

Nature as Revelation

361

clever but murderous tools of the trapper, the archer, and the ﬁsherman lie
neglected—familiar but unused. This allows him a distinctively gentle and
absorbed relationship with the wildlife around him, anchored in the new
Buddhist doctrine of not taking their lives.
At the same time, the wild ﬁsh, wild birds, and wild animals—independent
beings quite different from their domesticated agricultural counterparts—are
on their long journey to becoming merely spiritual. Merely aesthetic. No longer
relevant to the survival of everyday human life. Xie is attuned to them with
what is still a socially inherited hunter’s intensity, but without a hunter’s
unavoidable cruelties. Hence with an extraordinary and intoxicating purity.
But intensity not rooted in necessity is hard to maintain over the longer run,
except perhaps for a handful of scientists and artists.
Buddhism also stirred another impulse. Xie dreamed of transforming his
estate into a latter-day incarnation of the holy parks and groves of the
Buddhist scriptures. “These days,” he wrote in his annotations, “we plant
gardens and create parklands near to woods in imitation of the Buddha in
times past.” Faith inspired development.
IX
I have with reverence received the commandments of holy writings,
And scrutinized respectfully the scriptures of former times
That hold hills, and distant countryside, to be ﬁlled with space and light,
But say cities and markets stink. — Like live goats or rotting viands.
So the mighty Bodhisattva vow of all-encompassing pity
Draws up the multitude of beings from the gulf of their perdition.
How could he sojourn in this world and merely speak words that are
empty?
He must lend others his excellence before he can reach perfection.
Thus we respect Gautama’s deer park, ﬂowered source of the Four Noble
Truths,
Desire the famed Magic Vulture Summit where he spoke the Lotus Sūtra,
Longingly look for the unsullied grove where he passed at last into nirvān a,
˙
And — the place where he preached the ‘Vimalakı̄rti’ — the sweet-scented
Mango Garden.
He is far removed from us now, yet his face remains limpidly pure,
And it’s said that the music of his compassion perpetually perdures.
So one hopes, when building lodgings for monks, on lonely, untroubled,
peaks,
When their tin staves’ reverberations stop, their shoulders will feel relief.

362

Perceptions

A ‘bodhisattva’ is a being who either will not, or perhaps even cannot, take
the ﬁnal step into nirvān a until all other beings are ready to do so, since all
˙
beings are interdependent.65 He therefore remains in existence to help them.
‘Nirvān a’ may be thought of as the ending of the previously interminable
˙
cycles of reincarnation of a particular and distinctive individual ‘soul’ or ‘self ’.
This occurs when the separate, personal soul dissolves as the result of its own
awareness that, like all composite objects, it is itself an illusion, created by the
mind. ‘Gautama’ is of course the Buddha. A ‘sūtra’ is a Buddhist scripture; it is
rendered in Chinese by the same word as that for a Confucian or Daoist
classic. The Vimalakı̄rti-nirdes´a was a set of dialogs on the beliefs of the
Mahāyāna school, focused on the ﬁgure of Vimalakı̄rti, and popular in China
during and after the fourth century.
This tradition had to be kept alive:
These were the reasons that when, at the outset, I made a survey and
plans,
I tramped around on my own, with a staff supporting my balance,
Going down into the gorges, and fording my way through the depths,
Clambering into the ranges, then traversing the hills with my steps,
Scaling the mountain summits, but not pausing to catch my breath,
Following every spring to its source, but continuing on without
stopping,
With only the breezes to comb my hair, and the falling rain to wash me,
And the dews at night to be confronted, and the turning stars to follow.
I reﬁned my superﬁcial conceptions
And removed any projects that were defective.
Not divining by stalks or the turtle’s shell
I selected the best, picked out the exceptional.
I hacked away brambles, I cleared open tracks,
On the lookout for rocks and precipitous banks,
Surrounded by mountains on all four sides
And two rivers, with their circuitous winding.
Its face toward the southern hills,
I built a Pavilion for the Scriptures.
Its back against the northern cliffs,
I constructed a Hall for Exposition.
Under the awe-inspiring fells
I established meditation cells.
Looking down to the plunging brooks below,
I placed monks’ dwellings in a row.

Nature as Revelation

363

Face to face with towering trees, some hundreds of years in age,
I imbibe the sweetness of virtue grown rich through countless past generations.
Springs that date from remotest antiquity lie enfolded in my embrace,
I delight in their sleek-gleaming liquid, perpetually pouring unstained.
Gorgeous pagodas that rise in the suburbs, you have I bidden farewell,
To live a life different from the existence of those close to urban centers.
My pleasure is contemplating the simple, like the tree trunk ungouged by
the blade,
And my ﬁll of sweet dew — that favor bestowed — in a place where one
grasps the Way.
The ‘stalks’ refer to the casting of a bundle of yarrow stalks to determine the
appropriate hexagram when consulting the Book of Changes. The ‘turtle’s shell’
indicates the undershell that in archaic times answered questions put to it
about the supernatural causes of events and the future. This was done by interpreting the cracks that appeared when the shell was pierced with a sharp hot
point (see chapter 5). The ﬁrst method has continued to be used even until the
present day, though tossing coins is much preferred; the second has long been
obsolete. Perhaps the point of his lines is that neither would have been appropriate for a Buddhist enterprise.
According to Xie’s notes, the followers of the Buddha “ﬁnd no beauty in
showiness,” and hence leave the cities and suburbs behind. Rather, “it is where
there are purity, emptiness, and silence that one obtains the Way.” There were
practical spiritual reasons for living deep in the countryside.
In the next section he describes two monks, Tanlong and Faliu, friends of his
who seem to have lived for a time on his estate:
They have taken leave of the loving kindness of their parents, abandoned
their wives and children, and, becoming weightless immortals, entered the
mountains to live as hermits. All their links with the outside world have
been severed. They consume neither ﬂesh nor ﬁsh. This sweeping clean of
impurities always affects the body: if one looks at them in appraisal, one’s
breath stops short in admiration, but the two masters of the dharma remain
unaffectedly calm.
To make sense of his eulogy, it needs to be recalled that the ‘Six Transitions’, or
means of reaching nirvān a, were charity, morality, patience, energy, contem˙
plation, and wisdom. ‘Phenomenal’ here has its literal meaning: pertaining to
outward phenomena. ‘Noumenal’ refers to the domain of the mind, where
understanding comes through reason rather than the senses. ‘Karmic response’
indicates how all deeds (karma) are thought to carry with them inexorable

364

Perceptions

consequences, good or bad depending on whether the deeds are moral or
immoral.
The monks’ essential abstinence is, painstakingly, observed.
They make clear, too, their cherished inner thoughts, so others may easily
learn them.
In phenomenal life they interact with a multitude of persons,
But in noumenal vision pierce beyond the human world’s outer surface.
They may make an excursion to one place, then elsewhere take their
repose,
Or erect a thatched-roof shack, leaning angled against a boulder.
Through the ever-moving seasons, as heat alternates with cold,
Their wills, and their acts prompting karmic response, never need to be
remolded.
They look on past, present, and future as being but dreams in the night,
And put into practice the Six Transitions in order to reach enlightenment.
They are borne along by their tranquil wisdom to reach the haven of
silence,
To dwell in that dark remoteness where all patterns have combined.
They designated the Eastern Peak for our other-worldly meeting,
Which gave me an occult premonition of the Heavenly Western Region.
Though this single, day-long, encounter seemed to me like a thousand
years,
Yet I still felt dissatisfaction that we had never met previously.
The courtesies of the occasion, his appreciation of his friends and mentors,
intertwine with the ultimate themes of existence.
The landscape has become an ever more complex conception. There are
strata of literary references and history, mythology, philosophical polemics,
geography, topography, landscape architecture, and botany and zoology. Now
it is transformed into a deliberately created evocation of the scenes of the
Buddha’s life, as well as something ultimately unreal. An illusion. These
dimensions coexist. Most of them, if a mathematical metaphor is not out of
place, are orthogonal to each other. In other words, anything that exists in one
dimension has no necessary implications for anything in a dimension at right
angles to it, and vice versa. It is a misunderstanding of this style of thinking to
be disturbed by what common sense, in one way quite reasonably, regards as
contradictions.

Nature as Revelation

365

Another of these appears in the pendant on Daoism. “Although those who
study the immortals,” he says, “have not reached the heights of the Buddhist
Way, yet they have gone beyond the outer surface of the world.” In spite of his
earlier apparent fascination with herbs that may make it possible to attain
physical immortality, he now presents it as a second best:
Other entities they dismiss as worthless, valuing only themselves.
Casting aside the everyday world, they treat magical power as precious,
Appalled by the hastening of the years,
And regarding an endless life as dear. . . .
They ﬁnd the pine and the cassia sweet, though these both have a bitter
taste.
They delight in skins and plebeian hemp as decrepit disguise for their
shapes,
And long for the day when, like molting cicadas, they toss their bodies
away. . . .
Although they have never trodden the steps to the ultimate stage of the
Way,
They’re detached from those hereditary frills that indicate social status.
Having described the superhuman inhabitants of the landscape, Xie turns to
those who perform the daily labors on his estate. Note, though, that he does
not mention them as individual human beings. They are present but anonymous. Subordinate. Implicitly interchangeable.
The identiﬁcation of the less common plants once again presents problems.
For example, the term that I think is used here for the Chinese gooseberry
(Actinidia chinensis) is the normal Chinese name of the carambola, but this
year-round tropical and subtropical tree is unlikely to have existed so far
north, especially during a period of colder climate; nor would it have been
described as a climbing shrub, fruiting late in the year. The xian is in all probability a lichen, maybe something like the Evernia prunasti that grows on plum
trees and is used as a medicine, or the lung lichen (Sticta pulmonaria) that also
grows on trees and is a substitute for Iceland moss. The names of plants even
less easily identiﬁed have had simply to be transcribed.
Most of the additions to the original main text are easily justiﬁable on the
basis of Xie’s own notes, or simple clariﬁcation. Note, however, that I have
translated ‘chalky soil’—whereas the original just says ‘mud’—in order to give
some sense to the next line but one that talks about the extraction of ‘lime’.
Likewise I have written ‘peat’, rather than the dictionary translation ‘coal’, for

366

Perceptions

the material that Xie says was taken out of the ‘waterlogged’ layer. That ‘Pure
Liquor From The Hills’ is the name of their grape wine is a guess. It is worth
noting, though, that the assertion that every entity follows its own ‘laws’ is a
literal rendering. The key word is lü, which means several things: a standard
pitch-pipe, for example, but also a law decreed by authority. The idea that
nature had laws, as contrasted with patterns or principles, was thus within the
conceptual range of early medieval Chinese culture, even if not common.
References to the Scripture of Songs are found in several places. The two lines
on gathering grass and twisting it into cord are virtually a direct quotation.66
As always this raises a shadow of uncertainty about the directness of all of the
author’s apparently personal observations.
X
Tasks have to be done in the hills, and obligatory work on the rivers,
But I need no herdsmen for guarding stock — not a single individual.
For the other jobs, I’m furnished with servants, people of every
description,
Who, bestirring themselves as the seasons require, are competitively busy.
Making their way up the mountains, they fell the trees with their axes,
Cutting the stems of bamboos, rooting out thickets of brambles.
Pulling up edible bamboo shoots, where these burgeon in our plantations,
And scratching the earth, to bring to the surface the embedded sprouts in
the vales.
The brown-haired gooseberries have the mastery over the plants that they
grip,
But their fruits are harvested in full during the fall and the winter.
The creepers of recumbent grasses trail across the unfarmed places.
Like huntsmen who dash through the streams, my men search for the vines
of wild grapes.
They ferment them into the vintage ‘Pure Liquor From The Hills’;
As the Songs record, when offered libations, the spirits “increase your
felicity.”67
Wine produced from glutinous millet possesses a bitter taste;
Per contra, that from well-matured shen has a much sweeter ﬂavor.
They are fond of the lofty groves they demolish, to make logs that will
grow shen fungus.
To get bark for paper, they scythe the ji, along the steep-pitched summits.
They dig out the purgative madder roots on the sunny south-face cliffs,

Nature as Revelation

367

And from fallen trunks on dark north slopes scrape off lichens for herbal
drinks.
In the hours of daylight one sees them out gathering grasses to serve as
straw,
And during the evening glimpses them twisting it into new twine and cord.
They sickle the broad-leafed zizanias, or snip through the stalks of reeds,
And use them to manufacture matting, or as dried fodder for beasts.
One moment one meets with a chalky soil, the next with a waterlogged
layer.
The products that each of these will yield are not at all the same:
The ﬁrst supplies lime for mortar, the second gives peat for warmth:
All things perform in accordance with their own particular laws.
In the sixth lunar month they collect the combs that brim with wild bees’
honey.
In the eighth they batter the chestnut trees, to set the chestnuts tumbling.
Commodities, ready for us to take, exist in such abundance
That I’ve only recorded a summary here, not listed every one.
This section is one of the foundations for the view that the ‘environmental
richness’, which chapter 7 on Jiaxing suggested existed in this region prior to
premodern economic growth, was a reality. Even so, this richness is understated. Xie—the devout Buddhist vegetarian—says in his notes that “none of
the activities related to ﬁshing and hunting has been recorded here.” They
would have made a considerable difference to the livelihood of the nonvegetarian majority.
The poem continues for several more pages after this. It includes local travelogs, sections on his well-disciplined fruit orchards with their “lines of trees
laid out like spread netting,” local longevity herbs, and comments on the
nature of life.
Perverse is the mismatch that exists between feelings and the
phenomena:
Pattern-principles and external forms are forever clashing in conﬂict.
But there are only marginal gleanings to be had about environmental matters.
The problem formulated at the beginning of this chapter has been to some
extent solved. The apparent conﬂict between a mystical delight in nature, a
respect for it, and a religious and artistic sensitivity to it, on the one hand, and
a process of determined exploitation and development, on the other, is largely
an artifact of our modern perspective, at least for this early medieval period in

368

Perceptions

the eastern coastal region. The natural infrastructure was still robust enough,
and natural resources still abundant enough, for it to be reasonable, in the
context of those times, not to see any immediate contradiction. Six hundred
years later this would be beginning to be doubtful. A thousand years later it
would be untrue.
The case has also been made that more than a millennium-and-a-half ago,
the concept of the environment had made its appearance, however ﬂeetingly,
in Chinese culture.

11
Science and Superfauna

The medieval Chinese poets’ perceptions of their environment need to be
compared with what was observed and imagined by those of a scientiﬁc cast
of mind. In other words, their insights need to be complemented by an examination of the styles of observation and conceptions of truth as these affected
the understanding of their environment by the Chinese in historical times.
Since ideas and perceptions are subtly but indissolubly linked in two-way
interaction, what did they think they saw? And why? How did they evaluate the
credibility of their information and theoretical constructs?
The richest material for this inquiry comes from a millennium later than
Xie Lingyun’s poem. For this reason, after a brief survey of ancient and
medieval Chinese proto-scientiﬁc attitudes to nature, the present chapter
makes what I hope is not too disconcerting a leap forward in time to 1608 ce.
This is the date when Xie Zhaozhe published his Fivefold Miscellany of some
1414 pages.1 The logic behind this is the same as that which led to a detailed
examination of “Living in the Hills.” The Miscellany crystallizes a characteristic type of thinking that, once understood, can be used as a point of reference for looking at somewhat similar patterns, both contemporaneous, and
earlier and later.
The reader will need to make an effort to readjust his or her time-frame after
the preceding chapter. We are now in a world that has already long ago experienced the medieval economic revolution, undergone many centuries of the
Chinese style of premodern economic growth, been familar with woodblock
printing for over three-quarters of a millennium, is ruled by mandarins
selected through competitive examinations rather than by aristocrats and
warriors, and has acquired the habits of an increasingly systematic scholarship.

370

Perceptions

Xie’s entertaining and ramshackle Miscellany is not a pinnacle of intellectual
achievement. The justiﬁcation for looking at it is that it reveals the strengths
and weaknesses of most of the Chinese styles of proto-scientiﬁc thinking, and
how they related to the environment. Above all, it obliges us to confront the
problem of observation. In what ways did the Chinese at this time actually see
a world that was different from the one we see, and tend, with an unreﬂective
carelessness, to assume that everybody sees, and has always seen?
That this is not the bland inquiry it may seem can be shown by dramatizing
it. Why did a lucid, sober, practical, and learned man like Xie Zhaozhe, who
was also demonstrably a skilled observer, at times see dragons? Dragons. Even,
on occasion, see them in the company of others, and agree with these others on
what they were, all of them, witnessing? This sort of phenomenon is, of course,
familiar from medieval Europe. Learned and lucid medieval Europeans were
at times convinced they had observed miracles. And of course it also happens
in some places even today.
Note that we are discussing observation, not belief. Because we tend, on the
basis of an unjustiﬁed common sense, to assume that observation is the
bedrock of belief, contemplating the possibility of inﬂuences sometimes
running in the opposite direction can be unsettling. The dragon question
needs to be taken seriously. Its restriction to China, and societies inﬂuenced by
China, makes its culturally speciﬁc nature patent.2
Modern science has gone to historically unprecedented, and culturally
unique, lengths to exorcise the problem of such false positives. Hence the
importance of its emphasis on logical rigor and quantiﬁcation, its largely
formalized internal coherence of explanation across an astonishing range
of phenomena, its public recording of information, its routinized experimental destruction-testing of its own hypotheses, and—when it is true to its
own genius—its perpetual self-questioning. The probability that we are still,
even today, somewhere, seeing ‘dragons’ of our own is lower, so far as we can
tell, than it has ever been. This does not mean that this probability is, or
can be, zero. Xie’s curious compilation has a contemporary, as well as a
historical, relevance.

The intellectual background
Just as early-modern science and quasi-science in the West had an intellectual
pedigree, both ancient and medieval, so did Xie’s. There were, for example,
earlier Chinese thinkers such as Wang Chong in Han times,3 and Shen Gua in
the Song,4 who touched on themes that Xie examines, and in a manner that

Science and Superfauna

371

sometimes has something in common with his. It may be useful to indicate
some of the ways in which his work differs from theirs.
Wang wrote in a more structured argumentative form than Xie. He aimed
at establishing certain a priori theoretical positions, notably that the universe
was not teleologically directed, and that the Han theory of the Five Phases of
Matter was untenable. A passage from his Discourses will illustrate his style:5
— Heaven and Earth are conﬂuences of matter–energy–vitality. Human
beings are nonteleologically self-generated, just as, after the conﬂuence of the
matter–energy–vitality of husband and wife, the child is self-generated. It
was not the desire of the husband and wife when their matter–energy–
vitality ﬂowed together to give birth to a child; the conﬂuence was driven by
the force of emotional desire, the child being born once the conﬂuence had
occurred. It is from the fact that husband and wife do not give birth to a
child by deliberate intent that we may know that Heaven and Earth do not
of deliberate intent give birth to human beings. This being so, man lives in
Heaven and Earth as a ﬁsh lives in a deep pool, or a louse on a human body.
If Heaven had of deliberate intent given birth to the ten thousand beings,
it should have caused them to love each other as kin. It should not have
caused them to prey upon each other. . . .
— Perhaps it will be said that it was for functional reasons that Heaven
caused them to prey on each other, this preying being the way in which they
fulﬁlled themselves. . . . If they did not prey on each other, they would not
develop functional utility. If metal did not prey upon wood, the wood could
not be fashioned into a state ﬁt for use. If ﬁre did not smelt metal, the metal
could not become a tool or utensil. . . . All animals of ﬂesh and blood
conquer one another, biting and devouring each other, being caused to do
so by the matter–energy–vitality of the Five Phases.
— I would answer this as follows: If it is the case that Heaven gives birth
to the ten thousand beings, desiring that they be of mutual use to each
other, and so have unavoidably to prey on each other, then, since Heaven has
given birth to tigers, wolves, venomous snakes, all of which are harmful to
human beings, does Heaven also want to make use of humans to be of
service to these creatures? . . .
In general, the reason that the ten thousand beings hack each other, and
despoil each other, and that creatures of ﬂesh and blood go so far as to bite and
eat one another, is that their teeth are sharp or blunt, their muscular strengths
superior or feeble, their actions cunning or unimaginative, their matter–
energy–vitality and their position-power6 masterful or contemptible. . . .
Human beings use sword blades to despoil each other, in the way that animals
use teeth, horns, claws, and fangs. . . . Thus, when there is a victor and a

372

Perceptions

vanquished, the victor is not necessarily imbued with metallic matter–
energy–vitality, nor the vanquished necessarily possessed of the essence of
wood [as Five Phases theory might seem to imply, since metal, as in an ax, is
deemed to overcome wood].
This sustained polemical approach is motivated by a well-deﬁned vision of the
amoral nature of the world. Xie’s relatively unsystematic collector’s approach
is quite different. He is open-minded, empirical, fragmented—questioning,
teasing, and entertaining—though he, too, does not like Five Phases theory
much more than Wang.
Shen Gua’s Jottings from the Garden of the Brook of Dreams is closer to Xie’s
Miscellany. It contains a similar potpourri of items on scholarship, history,
natural history, and literature besides curiosa7 such as rainbows that drink
from streams8 and tales of the supernatural.9 Here and there it contains examples of modeling: he demonstrates that the shape of the moon is spherical by
covering half of a globule with powder and rotating it to show the phases. The
comparison is limited to the shape, however, since the moon is taken to be
aether-like and required to have no substance, although acknowledged to be a
reﬂector. This is necessary in order to avoid ‘obstruction’ when it meets the sun
in the sky.10 Shen could also be an acute observer, capable of imagining the
mechanism and history that had shaped a landscape:11
When I was on an ofﬁcial mission to Hebei, I journeyed north of the
Taihang mountains [Northeast], where the shells of spiral and ﬂat shellﬁsh
were frequently embedded in the cliffs, as well as stones like birds’ eggs, lying
horizontally in the rockface as if they were belts. This area was thus once the
sea coast, though today it lies close to ﬁve hundred kilometers distant from
the sea to the east. What we call the ‘mainland’ here is entirely the deposition
of sediments. . . . In general, such streams as the Yellow River, the Hutuo, the
Zhuo River, and the Sanggan are all laden with sediment. To the west of
the passes [that is, modern Shaanxi], where the water runs through the
land, it is at a depth of not less than a hundred feet. Every year the mud has
been transported eastward, becoming the soil of the mainland, a patternprinciple that is inexorable.
He believed in the ‘transformation of things’, seeing as proof of certain aspects
of Five Phases theory the way in which water from a certain spring, if boiled,
left a precipitate of sulfate of copper, which if ‘boiled up’ again would yield
copper; or the way in which water dripping in limestone caves formed stalactites and stalagmites.12 Hearing of the death of the disciple of a relative who had
swallowed an alchemical residue made from mercuric sulﬁde while preparing
an immortality elixir, he commented that “given the complementarity of

Science and Superfauna

373

transformations, since it was able to turn into a major poison, how can it not
be the case that it could turn into a great source of good? Having been able to
kill a person after its transformation, it ought to possess the pattern-principle of
giving life to someone. It is simply that we have not found the method for this,
and therefore know that the formula for turning someone into an immortal
cannot be said not to exist, but that extreme care is essential.”13
He was also persuaded of the powers of a sorceress interrogated by one of
his friends. He found it reasonable that she should know about people’s affairs,
“even ﬁve hundred kilometers distant,” by putting her mind in contact with
“the sprouts in their minds,” but that, when put to the test, she did not have
clairvoyant powers as regards matters that another mind did not know, such as
the numbers of go counters “picked up at random” in a hand.14
It was the moral implications of what we should call ‘scientiﬁc’ phenomena
that often interested him most.15 Thus, at the conclusion of a discussion of
the inversion of the image in a concave mirror, in which he hypothesized a
“rowlock or drum with a waist” as “an obstacle” at the point where the reﬂected
image disappeared before inverting, he observed:16
How should this only be the case for material objects? People are the same,
there being but few cases where concern with some material object is not an
obstacle within them. If it is small, advantage and disadvantage are easily
inverted, and right–true and wrong–false interchanged.
He was less interested than Xie in the problem of validating or invalidating
evidence, but equally convinced of the key role of the mathematics and the
interplay of numbers that lay at the heart of the workings of the universe, and
of the difﬁculty, perhaps impossibility, of unraveling it. He was an expert in
calendar-making and the construction of water clocks, but also an astrologer,
who, in his own words, had spent many years “watching the Heaven for
portents and looking for signs.”17 Nonetheless he thought that complete
success was beyond human grasp:18
Those in this world of ours who talk about [fate-determining] numbers
have for the most part grasped their coarse vestiges, but some of these
numbers are extremely subtle and not to be known by depending upon the
calendar. They are, moreover, only vestiges. For those who can by sensitive
apprehension make contact with the causes at work in the world, vestiges
are not something with which they are involved. This is the reason why
spirits who have foreknowledge cannot easily be sought out by means of such
vestiges, let alone by the coarser aspects of the latter.
Those in this world of ours who discuss the stars rely on the calendar to
know what I have termed the extremely subtle vestiges, but calendars are

374

Perceptions

only the result of approximations. . . . When in the Yeping reign-period
[1064–7] Venus and Mars met in the stellar mansion Zhen . . . of the eleven
major calendars by which their courses were determined, none corresponded to the event, and in one case the discrepancy was thirty days. . . .
Their predictions all varied. . . .
Furthermore, the sky turns more than thirty degrees in a double hour,
this generally being called a ‘palace’. But within that double hour there is a
beginning and an end. How can the Dark Force and the Bright Force be
identical across the space of thirty degrees, but then alter abruptly when a
heavenly body makes the transition into another palace? . . . They are not
aware at all that within a month there is waning and waxing, the orb
increasing with the Bright Force before the full moon, declining with the
Dark Force after the full moon, and during the ﬁrst and last quarters being
in equilibrium. As to Wood dominating the spring, Fire summer, Metal fall,
and Water winter, there is the same phenomenon within a month. And not
only within a month. There is the same phenomenon within a day. . . . How
can one be sure that the four seasons do not likewise occur within a double
hour? Or within half an hour, a minute, or a split second? . . .
Furthermore, if spring is dominated by Wood, this latter must tirelessly
wane and wax during these ninety days. It is not possible for the world to
pertain to Wood up to the last double hour on the thirtieth of the third
month and then in the ﬁrst hour of the next day suddenly pertain to Fire.
Categories such as these cannot be fully known by the techniques that we have
in this world of ours.
Shen seems to have been more ﬁrmly in the grip of the old Five Phases metaphysics than Xie, but both shared a sense of the ultimate unknowability of the
universe.
Both the loosely categorized scrapbook format and the title of the Fivefold
Miscellany were probably inspired by the Miscellany from Youyang compiled in
the Tang dynasty by Duan Chengshi.19 The Youyang Miscellany is a mixture of
relatively credible historical anecdotes and observations, stories about the
uncanny feats of Buddhist monks and Daoist immortals, somewhat fanciful
‘natural history’, De Mandeville-style ‘anthropology’ of foreign countries, and
sober accounts of contemporary social customs. Brief examples are the
contempt of the Emperor Taizong for auspicious omens, which led him to
order the destruction of a white magpie’s nest beside the imperial graves,20 the
rainmaking by the monk Yixing with the help of an ancient mirror from the
palace treasury with a dragon on its handle-knob,21 the winged heads of
certain people in the Far South that detached themselves at night from their
bodies and went ﬂying away,22 the practice by the cruel and jealous wives of

Science and Superfauna

375

high-ranking ofﬁcials of branding the faces of their servant-girls who in any
way displeased them,23 the ability of certain tigers to force a corpse to rise to its
feet and undress itself before it was eaten,24 and the lack of aesthetic interest in
peonies before the Tang dynasty.25 There is also an occasional concern with
taxonomy, as in the classiﬁcation of animals on the basis of their diet.26
What differentiates Duan Chengshi’s book from Xie Zhaozhe’s is that Duan
almost never makes any attempt to appraise the truth or falsity of a report.
One of the few examples comes at the end of a tale of how the monk Yixing
saved the son of an old lady who had helped him in his poverty-stricken youth,
after the young man had been convicted for murder. Yixing is said to have used
his arts to make the stars of the Northern Dipper disappear, taking them
captive in the form of seven pigs, after which he persuaded an alarmed
emperor to issue a general amnesty, so that the stars reappeared at a rate of one
per night. Duan says that he ﬁnd this “exceedingly strange,” but that “since the
story was in every mouth, I have no option but to record it.”27
Tales like this are a reminder that the sober realism and acute protoscientiﬁc insight of many Chinese accounts of phenomena are to some extent
misleading as a general guide to the culture of imperial times.

The man
Xie Zhaozhe was a Fujianese born in Hangzhou some time in the middle of the
sixteenth century. He gained the highest degree in the civil-service examinations, held ofﬁce as a vice-minister in the Ministry of Works, and wrote on
hydraulics, the province of Yunnan, and other topics.28 People have tended to
regard the Miscellany as a catalog of oddities, regaling the reader with items like
the bisexual who could make love both ways, the mule who kicked a tiger to
death, famous gourmets who devoured children, or markets where living
people did business with ghosts.29 These were part of the book’s appeal, and still
make entertaining reading, but to think of Xie as merely the compiler of tidbits
is to miss the seriousness of his concerns.30 One of his motives was to prove that
the universe was a more complicated place than the neo-Confucians allowed
for with their simplistic invocation of ‘pattern-principle’,31 or the traditional
metaphysicians with their straitjacketed categories:32
There are cold ﬂames on the Mounds of Xiao [location unclear], and ﬁre
that pertains to the cold-dark principle on Lake Er [in the Southwest].
Furthermore, a temple in Jiangning county [in the East] has a perpetual
lantern, dating from Jin times, the color of whose ﬂame is blue-green and
which gives off no heat. If there are hot springs in Heaven and Earth, then

376

Perceptions

there are certain to be cold ﬁres. We must not discuss these matters from the
viewpoint of the summer insects [who cannot believe in the ice of winter].
He was fascinated by the question of whether some assertion was true or not.
This concern was initially focused on history, which he read from the age of
seven or eight on.33 He was conscious from his own experience of how historical records had been distorted by the pressures of interested parties:34
I once prepared the revision of a prefectural gazetteer. If the grandfather of
a serving ofﬁcial was not included in the section on Illustrious Worthies, the
latter would not stand for it. If the sons and grandsons of a serving ofﬁcial
were not all of them recorded, their grandfather would not stand for it. As
for those who had been lavish in their bribes, whose lands stretched in every
direction, who carried a ﬁlthy reputation while alive and would meet with
foul comments after their death, they even so pestered me unceasingly,
or made indirect arrangements to prolong their fame, forcing their wives’
relatives to make entreaties, or presuming on a power that I was obliged to
comply with. . . . The strong interfered openly; the weak sabotaged my
affairs in secret. On the day that the work was completed, less than ten to
twenty per cent of the original contents were still in it. Alas! If this is the case
for a prefectural document, what must it be like for the national histories?
Xie was not mesmerized by the written record. He was also aware of the
problem of historiographical selectivity. This is shown by his discussion of the
apparent ‘veriﬁcation’ of dreams:35
When the people of the present day read of the dreams recorded in the
historical annals, most of these latter came true. . . . Now people dream
every day. If these [few that were recorded] were the only ones to be so
veriﬁed, the dreams that did not come true must have been innumerable.
Xie is frequently skeptical of recorded events and interpretations, though also
on occasion bafﬂingly credulous. He also suspected that historians sometimes
fabricated events. Thus he argues that “the statement that a ‘guest star’ [a nova]
violated the constellation of the Emperor is merely a literary artiﬁce used by
historians [to convey their disapproval of the emperor’s conﬁdants]. It is not
necessarily an actual fact.”36 He saw the historiographical manipulations of
portents in the same light:37
After the [writing of the] monograph on the Five Phases of Matter in the
Han History,38 each event was categorized under a particular omen, and this
has continued to the present. Historians speak after an event has happened,
so that their words can be presented as having been fulﬁlled. Those charged

Science and Superfauna

377

with watching the skies speak before an event has happened, and thus many
of their utterances do not come true.
Finally, he thought that people could in good faith report illusions as true. The
following anecdote is an illustration:39
When my friend Sun Zichang was young, he was good-looking and clearheaded. On the night of the seventh of the seventh lunar month he was
much moved by the story of the Cowherd and Spinning Damsel [the stars
Beta and Gamma in Aquila and Alpha in Vega, traditionally believed to meet
only on this date, crossing the Milky Way on a bridge of magpies]. He
composed a prayer to them. . . . All at once, as if in a dream, he was
summoned by the immortal damsel to the Jade Apartments in the Jade
Watchtower, where he enjoyed the ultimate in human happiness. After seven
days he regained consciousness. At that time we all laughed at him, and were
of the opinion that he had been deceiving us. I would now say that it was
not deceit but that a demon had possessed him. When people have improper
thoughts, evil spirits can take charge of them, with the consequence that
what they think resembles a play on the stage [in being illusory].
In counterbalance with this skeptical attitude toward written sources and
human informants was an open-mindedness that was willing to consider, as he
remarked of an account of a huge hailstone at the end of the Tang dynasty, that
“although the words seem exaggerated, yet I suspect that there is nothing that
does not exist [somewhere] in the universe.” The lump of ice was said to have
been as “high as the temple’s ﬁrst-ﬂoor rooms” and have taken a month to
melt.40 His underlying attitude is expressed by the following:41
In most cases when people die and come to life again they depend on some
physical object for this purpose. The Daoists have a technique of ‘changing
the womb’. The explanation of this is that those who have passed through
their sojourn in this life purifying their bodily form can change the old so
that it becomes new, or perhaps, as one does with a house that has become
dilapidated, merely borrow the corporeal shell of some other person.
This phenomenon occurred on numerous occasions in Jin and Tang
times. It may be that those cases recorded in the Taiping guangji 42 are wild
and fabulous, but as to what is said in the monographs on the Five Phases
of Matter in the regular histories, I suspect they are not all of them false.
The strangest of all of these concerns a tomb from the Zhou dynasty that
was opened in the time of the Emperor Ming of the Wei [late in the ﬁfth
century ce], when a girl who had been buried alive there to accompany the
deceased person was found still living. This period can be calculated to be

378

Perceptions

not less than ﬁve hundred or six hundred years. Could her bones and ﬂesh
not have rotted? When the rebels Wen Tao and Huang Chao opened graves
throughout the empire [in the early tenth and the late ninth century respectively], no cases were heard of people coming back to life like this. I likewise
suspect that not all the cases recorded even in the regular histories are necessarily factually true.
Xie valued his own observations of phenomena, as may be seen from the
following two passages:43
There are ﬁre wells in Sichuan province.44 Their springs are as though of
oil, and when you heat them they burn. . . . There is also wood that yields
no ash. If you light it, it burns; but when, after a long time, the ﬁre goes out,
the wood is just as it was before. These are all strange objects that can serve
to extend our information about uncanny things. (Lu Konglin has heard
about a wood that yields no ash and is used to make furnaces. When ﬁre
is placed within it, it goes a translucent red color. I have not however seen
it myself.)
There is a small hillock below Lotus Peak that lies north of Fuzhou, the
color of whose soil is a dark red. It is popularly known as ‘Rouge Hill’. The
story goes that this is the place where the daughter of the King of Yue once
dropped her rouge paint. None of the hills that encircle Fujian is red in
color, and so [the natives of this province] are startled by its oddity. Later, I
myself traveled to the Guixi and Yiyang hills in Jiangxi province, all of which
are cinnabar red. . . . When I think now of the Red Cliffs in Chu . . . [and
other such cases I have not personally seen], I now consider that they are
indeed so, that is to say, red.
Xie implies that people tend to be startled only by, or skeptical about, that to
which they are not accustomed:45
I journeyed in 1579 with my paternal grandfather, . . . when he was in charge
of the ofﬁcial travel arrangements [for the commissioner to the Liuqiu
Islands]. We were halfway there when a typhoon arose. Thunder, lightning,
rain, and hailstones all fell upon us at the same time. There were three
dragons suspended upside down to the fore and the aft of the ship. Their
whiskers were interwound with the waters of the sea and penetrated the
clouds. All the horns on their heads were visible, but below their waists
nothing could be seen. Those in the ship were in a state of agitation and
without any plan of action, but an old man said: “This is no more than the
dragons coming to pay court to the commissioner’s document bearing the
imperial seal.” He made those attending on the envoy have the latter write a

Science and Superfauna

379

document in his own hand bringing the court audience to an end. The
dragons complied with the time so indicated and withdrew. That the
authority of the Son of Heaven is effective over the manifold spirits is a
principle about which there can assuredly be no doubt. If I had not witnessed
this event personally, it is unlikely that I would not have considered this
principle to be false.
Unless there is very clear evidence to the contrary we commonly see what we
expect to see. In another account of the same experience, Xie says that the
dragons were “suspended upside down from the edges of the clouds, and still
more than a thousand feet above the water, which rose boiling like steam or
smoke to conjoin with the clouds, the people seeing the dragons with minute
particularity”.46 What is clear is the importance that he attached to direct
observational validation.47 Elsewhere he says:48
The saying has been handed down that after the [winter] solstice snowﬂakes
are ﬁve-pointed. But every year as the winter moves into spring, I have gathered snowﬂakes and looked at them. All are six-pointed. Not one or two out
of ten is ﬁve-pointed. Thus one can learn that old sayings are not all of them
entirely valid.
Impeccable.

The underlying metaphysics
The two concepts of lı̌ or ‘pattern-principle’, and qì or ‘matter–energy–vitality’
underlay Xie’s thinking, though with qualiﬁcations.
First of all he thought that every entity in the universe had always existed
even if only as a potential:49
I do not know where these entities [that we experience today] were lodged
at the time before Heaven and Earth had come into existence. . . . Before
Heaven and Earth existed, there was Chaos, something like a hen’s egg.
Although a hen’s egg is a chaos, yet enwrapped within it is a conglomerate
of vitality. Thus, even if years pass, it will come forth in its season, and be
able to be transformed, and to take shape.
If Heaven and Earth had simply been chaotic, having at no time this Way
of Pattern-Principles enfolded within them, they would have been like foul
and muddy water that remains unchanged for ten thousand years. How
could they under such conditions have been changed in such a way that an
immense number of beings and phenomena came forth?

380

Perceptions

He argues that, as we might put it, there was no creation out of nothing, since
any void would have had to have contained, or been preceded by, the potentials
for the entities that existed later.
He also discriminates between the concrete and the abstract:50
Pattern-principle is the controller of Heaven–Nature. To declare that
‘pattern-principle’ is synonymous with ‘Heaven–Nature’ is, I fear, in the last
analysis, mistaken. Pattern-principle is insubstantial, whereas Heaven–
Nature has a deﬁnite embodiment. Heaven–Nature undergoes destruction,
whereas pattern-principle is neither born nor extinguished.
Elsewhere he insists that “pattern-principle must have somewhere within
which it can temporarily lodge, in the way that ﬁre is transmitted by ﬁrewood.
When the ﬁrewood is exhausted, the ﬁre is extinguished.” But then he goes on,
perhaps ironically, “If one says that the ﬁre is not the ﬁrewood, one might also
say that the ﬁrewood is the ﬁre. If, in comparable fashion, one says that when
the ﬁrewood is exhausted the ﬁre still remains, one might equally maintain
that the ﬁre and the ﬁrewood have both come to an end together. If this is so,
there is no need to go on discussing the matter further.”51
The pattern aspect of lı̌ emerges from a discussion of the planting of trees
around dwellings:52
Northerners grow numerous trees like the Sophora and Salix both in front of
their houses and at the back. Southerners do not. The people of Fujian
province have a particularly strong taboo against doing so. According to Sang
Daomao [an eighth-century expert on prognostication], when trees are
thickly crowded around a human dwelling, people leave it. If the trees
are dense the earth deteriorates; and when this happens human beings fall ill.
People of the present day observe the taboo for this reason. But are these
sayings of magic experts ﬁt to be given credence? The earth has ﬁrst to be rich
and fertile before grasses and trees will become dense. How could there ever
be such a pattern-principle as ‘trees being ﬂourishing and earth deteriorating’?
Xie dismisses the venerable theory of the Five Phases of Matter as having no
general applicability. He argues that Liu Xiang and his son, in the later ﬁrst
century bce, had forced the extension of what was originally a theory of
portents onto “all of Heaven and Earth, the myriad entities, animals and
plants, regardless of size”. Further, 53
When they had sought for veriﬁcation and correspondence and not obtained
them, they further forcibly imposed a match on events with the theory of
the Five Interactions;54 and hierarchical position, high and low status, eating
and resting, activity and repose, regardless of importance, were all allocated

Science and Superfauna

381

to its categories, and assigned to one of the Five Interactions. Even the
pattern-principles of the universe were made to appear to be no more than
this, while fudging and disregard of reason were taken to an extreme. . . .
For dynasty after dynasty the national histories have continued to have
monographs on the Five Phases of Matter. As to partial and total solar and
lunar eclipses, and changes in the planets, as well as major calamities and
uncanny events, these have also been assigned to the categories of astrology.
How could the Dark and Bright Forces and the Five Phases of Matter simultaneously have two different pattern-principles?! What is more, how could
winds, rain, thunder, and lightning not pertain to the categories of astrology?
Their theory is infuriatingly wrong to an extreme degree, and does not reach
to the essentials.
This rejection of forced categorizations was as perceptive as the insistence on
distinct physical laws for the heavens and the earth was unfruitful.
Heaven–Nature was not, however, purely physical. It was something
conscious that responded to moral concerns:55
The theory that Heaven is merely an accumulation of [relatively lowdensity] matter–energy–vitality has been current since ancient times
without change. But if it really were just an accumulation of
matter–energy–vitality, it would have to be inchoate and without understanding, confused and without any capacity to act. What then would exercise control over the four seasons and the multitude of beings? Who would
preside over births and deaths, and over good political order and
disorder? . . .
But Heaven’s benevolent guiding and retribution for misdoing follow as
swiftly as do the shadow and the echo. Good order and disorder, gains and
losses—these are as dependable as metal or stone. The thunderbolt and the
hailstorm, demons and monstrosities—none of these are accidents.
The moral dimension to causality will be looked at later. In practice, Xie more
often than not ignores it when examining particular problems. When he does
refer to it there are often implied paradoxes. An example is the entry on the
qiongqi, “the most evil of all animals: it devours good people and will not eat
the wicked.”56
Xie also believed there were matters beyond any understanding based
upon pattern-principle. These points emerge from his attack on Song neoConfucianism:57
The sages did not do away with the study of the sun, the moon, and the
planets, nor with numerological calculations. Sage–emperor Shun was

382

Perceptions

concerned with farmers, potters, and ﬁshermen. When, one morning, he
took up the position of emperor, he fashioned astronomical instruments so
as to master the orderly arrangement of these seven governors [the sun,
etc.]. Thus the pattern-principles of the Transformative Force were indeed
complete in their entirety in the world of the sages.
Among later generations, those such as Luoxia Hong [a calendrical expert
of Han times], the monk Yixing [the Tang-dynasty surveyor and calculator
of the size of the degree along a north–south meridian line], and Wang Pu
[the calendrical expert of the mid tenth century] thought deeply about the
numbers that express what is of the essence. They, too, were mentally able to
encompass Heaven and Earth. The armillary sphere and the yigai revolved
without error. The tubes used to divine the matter–energy–vitality originating in the earth from the movement of bulrush ashes, the sundials, and
the water clocks, did not miss the mark, being also of an exceptional nature.
By the time of the discussions of the Song-dynasty [neo-]Confucians,
however, they wanted to use the concept of pattern-principle to cover everything. Forsooth! There are many things under Heaven that cannot be fully
exhausted by the pattern-principles of phenomena. How much more is this
the case for Heaven itself!
Elsewhere Xie says: “As regards what we term as going to the ultimate limit, even
the sage is ignorant.”58 The cosmos had an ultimately unknowable character.
Each phenomenon possessed a distinctive pattern-principle of its own,
which was conceptually atomic. In other words, it was intuitively understandable only as a whole and not in terms of any constituent parts. It was also
operationally monadic in the sense that it did not interlock structurally with
other pattern-principles in any exact sense, even if there may have been, in
some loose fashion, mutual harmony or discord among pattern-principles.
These two properties of pattern-principle, namely conceptual atomism and
operational monadism, were obstacles that prevented the scrutiny of patternprinciple from giving rise to a process of analysis with enough momentum to
lead in the direction of modern styles of scientiﬁc thinking.
Two examples will anchor these observations. The ﬁrst is on earthquakes:59
In Fujian and Guangdong the earth frequently moves. From Zhejiang
northward, however, this is not regularly observed. Theorists aver that when
there is much water along the coasts of the sea the earth ﬂoats. In Qin and
Jin [in the Northwest] the land is high and dry, and without water.
At times however there are also trembling movements here, too. When
these movements take place, the land splits for several hundred feet. Those
who are unfortunate enough to encounter such an event fall into the crack

Science and Superfauna

383

together with their houses. When it closes up, there is no seam or ﬁssure.
Even if you dig very deeply, the people and the houses cannot be found. The
Hanlin Academy Compiler Wang Weizhen actually met with this disaster.
Thus, is it not a necessary reason for the fact that earthquakes in Fujian and
Guangdong do not cause the land to split that they are near to water, which
makes the land humid and not brittle? Even so, it is still impossible to understand whether or not the great earth is born as a single entity and has some
strange pattern-principle that determines if it moves or not.
The second passage is about cloudbursts, freak ﬂoods, and landslides:60
When there are sudden rains out of season in Fujian, the mountain streams
burst forth abruptly, and drown houses and huts. The locals refer to this as
‘the ﬂood-dragon (jiao) coming forth’. It is perhaps possible that this is the
pattern-principle.
It is generally the case that ﬂood-dragons and shen-dragons lie hidden in
mountain caverns. When many long years have passed they are either transformed into long-dragons or enter the ocean. Some years ago the people
who live near the ofﬁces of the Education Intendant below Mount Wudan
in Fujian regularly observed a huge python several hundreds of feet in
length either skulking on the lower slopes of the mountain or else coiled up
by the corner of the ofﬁce building. Its two eyes were like torches. One night
in the eighth moon, in the fall of the year siyou [?1549], there was a great
storm in which Mount Wudan collapsed. After this the python was never
seen again.
Invoking a dragon as the event-shaping pattern-principle was apparently
regarded as reasonable and adequate in such a context.
Sometimes, however, ‘pattern-principle’ comes close to indicating a secret
technique. Xie pursued some of these with determination:61
There are hu monkeys in Hangzhou that can transform themselves into
other entities. Most of them are in the examination halls and the old prefectural buildings. I lived alone in these places for several months with the idea
that they would be certain to come, and that it might perhaps be possible
for them to display the pattern-principle of transformation based on the
two primary forces. But in all this long time I obtained nothing.
A pattern-principle that he did observe, but which bafﬂed him, was that which
underlay the building of a stork’s nest:62
The technical cleverness of the avian tribes surpasses that of human beings.
Building a nest only makes use of one beak and two claws, yet its interwoven

384

Perceptions

structure is more secure than human handiwork. A great wind can uproot
the tree but the nest to the end never falls.
When I was in Wuxing I observed a male and a female stork planning the
construction of a nest on the statue of the mythical beast that guards against
ﬁre on the roof ridge of the prefectural hall. Since there were no side
supports, and no branches or leaves, any wood inserted into it would have
fallen. Everyone in my family laughed at the birds, but after ten days had
passed, the nest was ﬁnished. A stork stands six or seven feet high, and for
both the male and the female to lie hid within it meant, I would reckon, that
it was more than ten feet across. I do not know how they crisscrossed
random pieces of wood and withered branches in multiple layers to make it
so cohesive and without weak points. This is a pattern-principle that is
impossible to comprehend.
In these passages pattern-principle has become a ‘black box’, something with
remarkable hidden internal properties whose workings cannot be examined.
This is particularly striking since an old nest could easily have been taken
down, inspected, and picked apart.
There may even have been a tendency to use the term ‘pattern-principle’
precisely on occasions when the explanation was obscure. Thus, after
remarking (not quite accurately) that there were no locusts south of the Yangzi
River, Xie adds: “This is a case of pattern-principle being incomprehensible.”63
When he thinks he does know the explanation, he is more inclined to use a
term like gù, which may mean either ‘reason’ or ‘therefore’. Hence he writes:64
Mosquitoes may be explained as the transformations of water creatures.
Therefore they are numerous in all places near the water. In the region from
Wu and Yue [the lower Yangzi delta area and Hangzhou Bay] to Jinling
[Nanjing] and Huai'an, everywhere suffers from their poisonous effects.
The worst afﬂicted are Wuxing and Gaoyou and Baimen. The reason for this
is that these areas are affected by their interweaving creeks and innumerable
waterways.
He had grasped the correlation, though not the cause.
The other key concept, qì, has been sometimes overtranslated in the foregoing pages as ‘matter–energy–vitality’. It also retained its earliest sense of
‘breath’. In a passage quoted above65 it was seen to be, in and of itself, “inchoate,
without understanding, confused, and without any capacity to act.” Qì may
be endowed with something like good or bad moral impulses, but it lacks
consciousness. In general it carries the implication of being the force, or
breath, of life. This is evident from Xie’s discussion of what used to be called
‘spontaneous generation’:66

Science and Superfauna

385

‘Transformations of matter–energy–vitality’ and ‘transformations of
conﬁgurations’ each play an equal part in what happens between Heaven and
Earth. Human beings, the six domesticated animals, and all that are born
from the womb and from eggs, are cases of transformations of conﬁgurations.
Others, such as ﬂeas, lice, silverﬁsh, grubs, tadpoles, and grain-borers are
born without the use of ova.67 After they have been born they enwrap themselves in a form and become complex, and when they are extinguished they
vanish totally, without the means to come forth again. The explanation for
this is that the matter–energy–vitality of the generative capacity of the Dark
and the Bright Forces rules over their birth and parturition. Therefore, once
they have undergone vaporization and fermentation they are capable by
themselves of taking on a form.68 This is to say that the Dark Force and Bright
Force are their mother and father.
Later he records the popular belief that lice would desert someone who had
been sick for a long time and was about to die, “because his matter–energy–
vitality has become cold.”69 After discussing the difference between mules and
hinnies, Xie extends his comments to human beings: “It is evident that in
human beings the matter–energy–vitality with which one is naturally
endowed comes from the father and not the mother.”70 (!) Sickness could also
be conveyed by qì, moving as a sort of miasma.71
The matter–energy–vitality of the earth affected the growth of plants and
trees.72 It was in the clouds covering over the hills along the sea coast—under
which dragons slept.73 And it inspired the public-spirited righting of wrongs in
the character of a famous worthy of ancient times.74 Perhaps the most striking
linking of qì with the force of life comes in a passage which opens with a
discussion of whether or not the dead “have conscious awareness.” He argues
that both positions raise difﬁculties, and follows this with similar comments
on the question of the existence or nonexistence of the shades of the dead and
spirits. He then goes on: “Human beings obtain matter–energy–vitality from
Heaven and Earth, and are thereby born. When they reach death, this
matter–energy–vitality is exhausted.”75 The quality of their matter–energy–
vitality determines the quality of their characters.
The concept of ‘matter–energy–vitality’ is thus protean. It can be the basic
substantia of the universe, taking different forms by means of condensing and
rarifying. It can be as it were the vehicle for other properties—public-spiritedness and disease, for example. In a discussion of the best kinds of water for
making tea, Xie advocates “mountain water,” but it is necessary to ﬁnd it “near
villages where people live,” otherwise “in the depths of the mountains and
empty valleys, it is to be feared that there are malarial mists and poisonous
snakes that are not conducive to human beneﬁt, and that even if they are not

386

Perceptions

poisonous, will give people febrile diseases. The reason for this is that the
ﬂavor of the matter–energy–vitality and the ﬁve human viscera have not yet
grown accustomed to each other.”76 And, ﬁnally, qì can be the direct source of
life. In one form or another it is prevalent throughout the universe. It is a
means of linking entities, whereas pattern-principles tend to be means of
dividing and distinguishing them: “Between Heaven and Earth there is only a
single matter–energy–vitality.”77
The structure of qì also raises problems. Xie reports bizarre stories about the
eating and drinking habits of rainbows, which drained wells dry and
consumed banquets. He comments that “rainbows are the matter–energy–
vitality of the Dark and Bright Forces. They are suddenly born and suddenly
disappear. Though they have form, they have no substance, so it is strange that
they can eat and drink.”78
Neither of the two basic concepts outlined here was conducive to precise
argument. They explained both too much and too little. Along with other
ideas, like the Five Phases of Matter, they also helped shape the conceptions
that lay at the back of perceptions. What is interesting about Xie is that he
consciously felt the inadequacy of all of them, and at times for a moment
broke free, though never decisively.

The collection of facts
One of the motives behind The Fivefold Miscellany was the collection of facts.
Xie stresses the problems in making reliable observations. Thus, when
discussing dragons, after noting that they are meant to have horns like a deer’s,
a head like a camel’s, eyes like a demon’s, a neck like a snake’s, a belly like a seaserpent’s, scales like those of a ﬁsh, claws like those of an eagle, palms like a
tiger’s, and ears like those of a bull, he adds: “On all occasions when dragons
appear, however, their bodies are guarded by thunder and lightning, and by
clouds and mists. Times when their entire form can be seen are rare.”79 But
there was some evidence:80
In the summer of 1598, in Jurong,81 there were two dragons mating with each
other. One of them was in difﬁculties and fell to the earth, lying struck down
amid the ﬁelds. People came from more than a hundred kilometers away in
their eagerness to see it. After three days a storm picked it up and it rose into
the air again.
He also mentions an ofﬁcial who, when working on the lower Yellow River,
found the cast-off exuvia of a dragon some tens of feet long, “with scales,

Science and Superfauna

387

claws, mane, and horns all complete.” The bones were “hard and white as
jade.”82 A fossil dinosaur?
Other evidence was less direct. Early in the eighth century ce, for example,
a phoenix was pursuing two dragons near Huaiyin, where they fell to the
ground and were transformed into two streams. “One of them was wounded
by the phoenix’s claws to the point where its blood ﬂowed, and the stream’s
color has ever since been red.”83
Xie takes the existence of dragons for granted. “Although dragons are spiritlike beasts, they are nonetheless regularly to be found in the world. People see
them but rarely. But it is because this one single species from the aqueous
tribes controls all the clouds, rains, thunder, lightning, and hail that we designate them ‘spirit-like’.”84 Since dragons were territorial beasts, certain areas
might enjoy rain while those close by had none.85 There was a large variety of
types of dragon because they were so licentious that “there is nothing with
which they will not copulate.”86 The result was a proliferation of hybrids. Their
lust was also exploited in practical fashion by the rainmakers of southern
China: “They suspend a young girl in the air, to compel the dragon to rise up.
When the dragon sees the girl, he soars around her and desires to couple with
her. The practitioners use their art to prevent him from coming closer to her,
and before long the rain will have moistened people’s feet.”87
Xie had the same matter-of-fact attitude toward fox-spirits, assuring us that
“these days sixty to seventy per cent of the residences in the capital have foxspirits, but they do no harm to anyone. The northerners are as accustomed to
them as those in the far south are used to sharing their dwellings with
snakes.”88 When the cats of Jinhua in southern Zhejiang province are more
than three years old, they are also capable of bewitching people, he tells us,
observing that “it is not just foxes.”89
Yet he was a seasoned observer who often pooh-poohed superstitions, such
as the Fujianese belief that owls brought bad luck: “They say these birds are the
envoys of the City God, gathering souls. If an owl hoots at night on a house in
a city, the owner is destined to die. Those who live near the mountains,
however, or deep in the woods, are accustomed to hearing them, but never
witness this phenomenon.”90 If he had not seen something himself, he was apt
to be skeptical: “The ancients say that the ﬁsh-hawk gives birth to its young by
spitting them out. This is by no means certain. Furthermore, the ﬁshing
cormorant, which also gives birth from a womb, spits from its mouth. I
frequently see assertions in books about phenomena that I have never observed
personally.”91 He has himself played with stingless bees; so they are real.92 Per
contra he gives credence to stories about the human-faced snakes of the Far
South: “They know people’s family and personal names. In the mornings they

388

Perceptions

covertly watch them walking in the mountain valleys, and call out their names.
If the person answers, then that night they come to kill him.”93
Here is the problem: Xie has no procedure that will systematically tend to
establish facts and to discredit falsehoods. Hence it is possible for him to show
a relatively high level of logic in his arguments, but to make no useful progress,
because often what he takes to be facts are not.
The ‘fact’ was a complex European cultural invention that crystallized in the
seventeenth century. It was not known in premodern China. By a ‘fact’ in this
sense, I mean a publicly recorded and accessible statement about an observable
aspect of the world, set in the context of a systematic evaluation of the evidence
that yields an approximate probability of its being true, and subject to a
continuing public scrutiny and re-evaluation, with the results and the evidence
being publicly recorded and accessible. China came quite close; what was
mainly lacking was the continuity of public scrutiny and the circulation of the
results. In other words, the feedback process. In Western Europe the concept
originally grew out of the practices of the law courts, before it spread into
natural history and the laboratory. It depended upon the publication of
reports through books and journals, and the exchange of ideas through
learned societies, universities, museums, and other such institutions.94 China
had printed books, and some institutions such as the state university in the
Tang and Song, as well as the local ‘academies’ founded in Song times and later,
but the rest of the complex was largely missing.95 We may even surmise that the
‘fact’ in this sense required a form of collective mental discipline that brings it
into the ‘civilizing process’ described by Norbert Elias.96 In terms of the particular terminology used here, it is not unreasonable to say that late-imperial
China was unacquainted with facts.
Something less obvious but equally important was also almost missing. This
was the ‘program’, a plan of collective systematic work. The one exception by
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was textual research.97 It is strange
that Xie, who had many friends and contacts, never thought to organize them
to look, for example, at the details of the geographical and environmental
distribution of goiter across the empire, which was a subject that interested
him, and even to set up a continuing network of colleagues to elucidate the
problem by communicating their results to each other. In Western Europe, in
contrast, what Alistair Crombie calls the ‘new style of effective scientiﬁc
communication’ was developed early in the seventeenth century, notably by
Marin Mersenne. The idea of the program, of which there are hints in Francis
Bacon, Mersenne, Robert Boyle, and others, had become a crystallized and
self-conscious procedure by the later 1660s, as in Claude Perrault’s plans for
the collective work to be undertaken by the Académie royale des Sciences.98

Science and Superfauna

389

Although there were intermittent collaborations and occasional communications, the Chinese, in science, seem to have been loners in comparison with the
Europeans. Xie, like Wang Chong and Shen Gua in earlier times, seems never
to have proposed any systematic and cumulative way, for himself or others, of
setting out to learn more of the truth about something scientiﬁc in the future.

Experiments and thought-experiments
We may deﬁne ‘experiment’ as the use of man-made, controlled, and repeatable situations in order to establish the degree of the reproducible covariation
between, ideally, one particular varying input and an output. Its roots are
ancient and probably lie in the craftsman’s ability to produce approximately
consistent results, ‘craftsmen’ including horticulturists and cooks as well as
ceramists, and in the physician’s efforts to ﬁnd consistency in the effects of
medicines and other treatments on a given state of a patient’s body.
The logic of experiment in this crude sense was evident to Xie, even if he
never used it systematically. An example of the experimental style of thought
is his use of it to dismiss the view that “all the hares in the world are female,
and that only the hare in the moon is male, this being the reason that hares
become pregnant at the time of the full moon.” He argues that “if you were to
place some hares in a darkened room, so that for a full year they were not
allowed to see the moon, would there be none of them who were pregnant?”
This thought-experiment, whose negative answer is assumed to be obvious, is
strengthened by a reference to male hares in the Scripture of Songs, which thus
serves as an authority, and by the theoretical argument that “the moon is the
ancestral source of the multitude of dark-quiescent-female forces,” which thus
implies that the presence of a male hare on it is unlikely.99
A simple ‘experiment’ by which he thought the normally invisible matter–
energy–vitality underlying phenomena could be made visible was the
following:100
It is commonly said that ﬁsh do not see water and that human beings do not
see matter–energy–vitality. The reason for this is that people are moving in
the midst of matter–energy–vitality all the day long, and so are never able to
perceive it. In a room into which the sunlight leaks through a crack it is
however possible to see the dust busily rising like [the convection currents
in] boiling water. Even though one is inside a darkened room, it is as if there
were swift winds driving them along. In such circumstances one can apprehend how the universe works; one can observe the world; one can make one’s
heart–mind be at peace in meditative contemplation of [Zhuangzi’s

390

Perceptions

ancient] theory that all things are ultimately equal. If one brings out the
underlying purport of this, it may be termed the phenomenon of contact
between Heaven–Nature and human beings.
Xie’s misunderstood motes of dust were not themselves matter–energy–
vitality, any more than iron ﬁlings held in a magnetic ﬁeld are that ﬁeld, or particles in Brownian motion the molecules that agitate them. They were its markers.
A repeated religious sacriﬁce could be a type of experiment. Thus:101
Liang Fu was an astronomical ofﬁcial. During a great drought he prayed for
rain, but was not successful. He had ﬁrewood piled up in order to burn
himself as a sacriﬁce. As the ﬂames rose up, there was a heavy downpour
[and he was spared]. Dai Feng had the same experience in Xihua. Zhang Xi
of Linwu was the magistrate of Pingyu, and did likewise but immediately
died in the ﬁre. There have been registrars and other minor ofﬁcials all of
whom have followed the path of self-incineration, and for whom, once the
ﬂames have died away, an opportune rain has fallen. . . . The rain caused by
the former two men was the means whereby Heaven showed that It listened
to the wishes of the lowly. The burning to death of the last-mentioned was
the means whereby Heaven cut off any tendency toward insincere actions.
Heaven is indeed contriving!
This was in essence an experimental situation, even if the unreliability of
covariation required an escape route. Xie also comments not long afterward
that even numerous and sincere prayers for rain “are usually not answered,” a
clear negative correlation, speaking ﬁguratively.102 ‘Coercing a god’, as by
putting a punitive neck-collar around the neck of his statue if he failed to
bring rain, was also apt to be ineffective, and even dangerous;103 yet coercing
God is in a sense what consistently effective experiment is designed to do.
Horticulture was also a nursery for reliable proto-experimental practices:104
These days ﬂowers out of season are among the items regularly presented at
Court. They are, moreover, all conﬁned to semisubterranean cellars in the
earth, where they are surrounded on all sides by ﬁres so as to force their
growth. Thus there are peonies even in the depths of winter. . . . In fact, such
items out of their proper season are in conﬂict with the regular sequences
of Heaven and Earth.
The tricks used by growers of fancy vegetables and fruit also had some afﬁnity
with proto-experiment:105
Among the markets and theatrical performances these days one sees many
bottle-gourds which have a square shape, and some embossed with characters

Science and Superfauna

391

that form a poem. The explanation for this is that they have been caused to be
this way by being held between boards while they were growing. There is
nothing to marvel at.
Another example of conscious and controlled interference with the processes
of plant growth is the following:106
If bamboos grow too densely they need to be cut back. If this is not done they
will ﬂower and after a year has passed all of them will be dead. The same is
true of epidemics among human beings [population density leading to the
spread of infections]. . . . Generally speaking, if bamboos ﬂower they should
instantly be all cut down, leaving only their roots. They will re-emerge the
following spring.
The famous poison made from insects and called gǔ needed, says Xie, to be
“tested on a person” once it had been prepared:107
If there is no stranger passing by then assure yourself of the poison’s suitability on some member of your family. The person who has ingested this
poison will experience a twisting pain in his guts and vomit. All his ten
ﬁngers will go black. When he chews beans they will have no savor, and if he
puts alum in his mouth it will not taste bitter. This is the way the poison is
experientially veriﬁed.
Mercifully, he adds that there were antidotes, like liquorice root, so long as they
were taken reasonably swiftly.
Controlling ceramics ﬁred in a kiln is notoriously tricky, dependent on a
multitude of variables such as the sequence of temperatures over time, and the
location of the piece in the kiln. It is not surprising that extreme means were
sometimes taken to ensure desired effects:108
At the town of Jingde there were [in the past] regularly ‘transformations in
the kiln’. It was said that pieces did not follow the standard pattern of manufacture but would suddenly change, showing on the surface either the form
of live ﬁsh or a fruit that seemed to ﬂoat. The story was handed down that
when a kiln was inaugurated it was necessary to sacriﬁce the blood of a boy
and a girl, so causing the congealed concentrate of their matter–energy–
vitality to become these strange things. In recent times the use of humans
for sacriﬁce has been prohibited, with the consequence that there are no
longer any transformations in the kiln.
Ingredient X. Perfect negative correlation.
On a few occasions Xie did not check on an alleged property of an object
that would not have seemed in the least difﬁcult to examine. Thus he wrote of

392

Perceptions

boxwood (Buxus microphylla) that “it has been said for generations to contain
none of the element of ﬁre, and that when it is put into a stream this latter will
not ﬂow. This has not been put to the test, but it is perhaps not entirely true.”109
Would it have been too much trouble to ﬁnd out? And even to test the other
popular belief about it, namely that it grew smaller during years that contained
an intercalary month,110 a view about which he also had doubts?111 Finally, on
at least one occasion he scoffed at the process of proto-experimental enquiry
as lacking any practical point, not because the theory it might be seen as
checking up on could be seen at the ﬁrst glance to be ludicrous:112
The Record of Lost Things Picked Up states that: “Those who are good at
discriminating between horses split open the horses’ brains after they die in
order to scrutinize the color. If the color is bloody, the horse will have been
capable of traveling ten thousand li a day [about 5000 kilometers]. In cases
where the blood is yellow, the daily distance will have been a thousand li.”
Well now! The horse is dead, so what is the point of grading it? And is going
to the point of slitting open the horse’s brains still showing oneself good at
discriminating between horses? This, too, is utterly ridiculous.
He is not interested in the reality, or otherwise, of any connection between the
speed and stamina of a horse while alive and the color of its brains once dead.
Nor does he comment on the absurdly inﬂated ﬁgures. His concern is only
with the pointlessness, as he sees it, of post-mortem horse-grading.
We are left with a puzzle. Xie implicitly understands the basis of the experimental style of thinking, but he is not consciously aware of it as the foundation of a procedure that might lead to new insights.

Types of explanation
Xie’s preferred type of explanation is what may be called the ‘proto-epidemiological’. ‘Proto-epidemiology’ may be deﬁned as the examination of what
covaries with what spatially, temporally, or operationally, in the attempt to
isolate probable causes. A simple example: why do some hills have clouds
above them and others apparently not?113
The Record of Mount Lu states that, when the heavens are about to rain,
white clouds either cap the peaks or stretch along the central ranges. . . . In
not more than three days it is certain to rain. But it is not only Mount Lu
that is thus. For the most part, mountains of great height and with caves in
them are all able to spew forth clouds and so cause rain. . . . In Anding
prefecture there is Xianyang Peak, on top of which the clouds rise up when

Science and Superfauna

393

it is about to rain, resembling an open umbrella. A local proverb has it that
“Copious the downpour when Xian Peak opens its umbrella.” In Fujian the
principal summit of Drum Mountain towers over the sea and serves as a
landmark to which everyone in the provincial capital looks up. When clouds
shade its peak, it will be certain to rain on the morrow. . . . But other mountains are not all like this. The reason is that Drum Mountain has caves.
The key to the argument is the identiﬁcation of a decisive differentiating
factor. Caves are essential.
He uses much the same approach in his proto-epidemiology for the effects
of drinking-water:114
People who drink ‘light’ water are most of them bald and suffering from
goiter. Those who drink ‘heavy’ water mostly suffer from swellings and
lameness. Most of those who drink sweet water are loving and beautiful,
while those who drink bitter water are mostly afﬂicted with ulcers and
tumors. Most of those who drink ‘hard’ water are puny and hunchbacked.
In my travels through the empire I have observed that most of those who
drink water from streams are pure, and most of those who consume
brackish water are stupid. Most of those who drink water from the mountain deﬁles have goiter, and those who drink hard water are constipated.
Sweet-water people mostly live to a ripe old age. Those in Teng, Yi, Nanyang,
and Yizhou who drink the water from the mountains all of them suffer from
goiter, but those who themselves sink wells for drinking are not afﬂicted.
The springs and wells in the departments and counties along the sea coast
in Yanzhou in eastern Shandong are affected by the heavy salinity of the soil.
If people drink from them for a long time they suffer from constipation. If,
however, they do not eat foods made from ﬂour and drink river water, then
they are not affected. This last point needs to be known.
Another passage shows the same style of attempting to analyze what
covaried with what:115
The teeth of those who live in Jin [modern Shanxi] are yellow, whereas those
who live in the mountain deﬁles have necks affected by goiter. There are
numerous jujube trees in the Jin area and those who are fond of the fruit
have yellow teeth. But there are also many jujube trees in Qi [approximately
modern Hebei], so why should this apply only to Jin? Although goiter is
caused by the water of the mountain streams,116 those who drink the water
in many other northern places . . . are afﬂicted by it. Why is this not the case
for those who live among the countless peaks and valleys south of the Yangzi
River? I have never heard of any of them having neck disease.

394

Perceptions

As for the sedan-chair carriers in the north, whose backs and necks bear
a heavy weight for many days on end, they get swellings that resemble goiter
in form but differ by being on their faces and backs. The people of Lingnan
[the Far South]117 love to chew betel and their teeth are mostly brownish
black. Why should only Jin be thought to be so affected? As for the notions
that a rich matter–energy–vitality in the environment causes the character
of empathetic sympathy to be widespread, that a harsh matter–energy–
vitality causes widespread greediness, that a cloudy matter–energy–vitality
causes a lot of rheumatism, and that valley matter–energy–vitality is the
cause of widespread longevity, I fear that these are not entirely the case.
People of the Tatar race never suffer from smallpox, because they never
eat salt or vinegar. I have recently heard that those who trade with China,
and have also copied the Chinese fashion of eating and drinking, all subsequently contract it.
Xie thus had an intuition of the environmental basis of a number of diseases,
but his search to ﬁnd patterns of covariation, and then to identify the exceptions, did not lead to an attempt to improve the analysis on a second round.
There was no sense of a research program. Only a skeptical curiosity without
stamina.
A somewhat different style of explanation is found in his efforts to elucidate
physical phenomena. While still paying attention to what appear to him to be
the key differentiating factors, he also attempts to identify the physical
processes involved. A simple illustration is his description of a particular waterfall as “extremely strange” because it was silent but not projected over a
concave cliff, the basic prerequisite, he thought, for other ‘noiseless’ waterfalls.118 He is uneasy about the idea that the attraction of the moon is the cause
of tides, or the only cause, because the timing does not ﬁt exactly:119
As regards things that respond to the moon, the moon belongs to the darkmoist-female category, and is the ruler over water. When the moon is full,
oysters grow; when the moon is covered over, camphor contracts. Each follows
its category. Nonetheless, in the areas of Qi [in the Northeast], Zhejiang [in
the East] and Min [in the Southeast], and Yue [the Far South] the times of
the high and low tides are not the same, their arrival varying with distance.
This is empirically accurate so far as it goes. The timing of tidal maxima and
minima is multicausal.
A more elaborate treatment is that of mirages at sea:120
When there is marine-monster matter–energy–vitality in the sea off
Dengzhou,121 it congeals to form multistoreyed buildings and towers, and is

Science and Superfauna

395

known as the ‘sea market’ [i.e., a ‘mirage’]. I would however describe this as
‘marine matter–energy–vitality’ rather than just ‘marine-monster matter–
energy–vitality’.
In general terms, when the essence of the seawater congeals in large quantities it forms a shape, and when it disperses it forms light. All the beings in
the sea obtain possession of this matter–energy–vitality, and once this has
continued for a long period they are all of them able to produce illusions.
This is not merely the case for marine monsters.
My home is by the sea coast, and every fall the moon is extremely bright,
with water and sky being of the same color, and no waves across a vast
expanse. The largest of the oysters . . . are the size of a peck-measure dipper
and emit a pearl whose rays reﬂect back the light of the moon until, all of a
sudden, the emission forms [the illusion of] city walls, markets, manystoreyed buildings, and pavilions. If one intercepts the ﬂux of light, the
images will make the transition ﬁrst to a state of obscurity and then vanish.
People who live by the sea coast are so used to this that they think it
commonplace, and are not aware how strange it is.
As for such creatures as crabs . . . and rock-oysters, they all have beneath
their covering of accumulated shell the capacity to emit light in the darkness
for more than a foot, appearing as a twinkling. There is no doubt but that
this is the matter–energy–vitality of the seawater.
Preconditioned conceptualization.
From time to time Xie says that some phenomenon or other cannot be
explained: “Some springs in the empire have a constant outﬂow, never running
dry and never overﬂowing. Not running dry is easy to understand, but what is
the reason for it never overﬂowing? This is a pattern-principle that cannot be
known.”122 Why not? He was aware of ground water, or, as he called them, “the
arteries of springs that are in the earth and invisible.”123 All he needed to
imagine was some underground combination of sills, and a separate reservoir
and overﬂow basin, not unlike the system used for the Ming Grand Canal
where it went over the Shandong hills. Modeling would have been useful, but
was not attempted.
He was at his best in proto-archaeology:124
The ﬁrst emperor of Qin set up an uninscribed stele on Mount Tai. There are
many confused explanations for this, none of them as yet established as
correct. Some people consider it to be a stele-type receptacle; some a
guardian-stone; some a surface for an inscription that was never cut; and
some a monument. All of these are notions without foundations. I have
made a personal visit to the site, and gone on a tour of inspection around the

396

Perceptions

vicinity. The view that I have come to is that the theory closest to the truth
is that it was a monument.
The explanation is that although the stone is high and of a size large
enough to make it comparable to an ordinary stele, it is certainly not a
container. The type of stone is not to be found locally on the mountain, nor
is it the kind of stone ordinarily used for inscribing characters. There is a
cover on its top and a pediment at its base, which appear to constitute a
completed whole. Thus it is not an as-yet uninscribed stone.
If one examines the Records of the Grand Historian, the First Emperor
went up Mount Tai and set up a stone on which to offer sacriﬁces. During
his descent the violence of a storm led him to shelter under a tree, on which
he bestowed the rank of ‘Wudafu’. He also sacriﬁced to Mount Liangfu [a
subsidiary summit]. The stone he set up there was inscribed. . . . Thus a
stone on Mount Tai was inscribed, and at present there is still preserved in
the side-ofﬁce of the shrine of the Lady Immortal Yuan-jun a broken stele
bearing twenty-nine characters, which I suspect was this inscribed stone.
This being so, it becomes clear that the piece of [uninscribed] stone
under discussion here was that erected on the summit as a monument to
the sacriﬁce.
Where, as in this last passage, Xie is in possession of a reasonable assemblage
of facts, including a personal inspection of the evidence, he is capable of
presenting a well-argued case. Whether he was right or wrong is another
matter, but not immediately relevant to the question of his style of thought.
He also had an embryonic conception of the capacity of the skilled artisan
to mimic or model the operations of nature. Thus he said of some archaic
astronomical instruments, military devices, and other mechanical contrivances
that: “Such extreme ingenuity as this surpasses the proper norms for human
beings and resembles the transformations of nature, being artisanal skill that
approaches the excessive. It is also, however, the intelligent apprehension of the
free course of Heaven–Nature, and not something that may be attained by the
forcible application of wisdom.”125 The craftsman’s intuition could be uncanny
in its ability to capture aspects of the working of the world in models, instruments, or mechanisms but was often beyond the reach of a solely intellectual
understanding. Elsewhere he speaks about wooden automata that could, for
example, bake bread for a housewife, and a boat that could go by itself without
the help of wind or currents.126 The only example that probably worked as
described was an automated toilette cabinet for an empress, with ﬁgurines that
came in and out of doors, or so it appeared, of their own accord.
The concept of modeling a natural process also appears explicitly, if brieﬂy,
in one of his comments on the astronomical instruments at Beijing: “There is

Science and Superfauna

397

also a bronze sphere one rotation of which from left to right is a means of
imitating the structure of the heavens.”127
The idea of invoking a historical process to explain a present-day situation in
the natural world was likewise familiar to Xie:128
There are many rocks in the Yi hills129 of a bluish black color. Looked at from
below they seem crowded together like bamboo shoots. All the mountain
paths run along by the edge of these rocks, or look out from beneath
them. Underneath all of them there is sand, on which the rocks depend for
a stable footing.
Over a long course of time, the sand has gradually been stripped
completely away by the winds and the rains, and holes and cavities have
opened up as it were in competition each one with the others. The rocks
have likewise lost the ability to stand steady, and it regularly happens that
some of them will fall down from the mountain crests and into the middle
of the farmers’ ﬁelds.
Geomorphology!
The closest parallel in China to the historical logic developed in Europe for
the ﬁliated development of languages would, however, have been the analysis
of the slowly changing pronunciation of the Chinese characters over the
centuries, a study that became highly reﬁned during the following Qing
dynasty,130 but is hardly present in the Fivefold Miscellany.
Xie’s limited concern with taxonomy and classiﬁcation is surprising, given
the existence of numerous pharmacopeias and herbals in China, of which the
latest at the time he was writing was that of Li Shizhen, published in 1596.131 He
seems mainly interested in discussing why the written characters for certain
animals were composed with an inappropriate radical, like the graph for the
long-tailed proboscis monkey (wei, i.e., Cercopithecus aethiops) which incorporated the ‘insect’ radical,132 or why the names for certain plants assigned them
to the wrong category. Thus the aspen was the ‘white willow’, and the ‘waterpine’ was a type of alga (Codium fragile or macronatum).133 He did, however,
have a rudimentary idea of the problems involved:134
[The ancients] did not know what to make of the Siberian jerboa [also
written with the ‘insect’ radical], which is a rodent in front and a hare
behind. . . . When Shen Gua was on an embassy to the Qidan in Song times,
there was a jumping hare in the great desert. It had the shape of a hare but its
forelegs were little more than an inch long, while its hindlegs were more than
a foot in length. It progressed by bounding, and when it stopped it dropped
level with the ground. This was the Siberian jerboa. Such is the difﬁculty for
classiﬁers when they are trying to treat animals comprehensively.

398

Perceptions

At the price of admitting extremely elementary examples, the foregoing
account leaves only two of the principal styles of scientiﬁc thinking without
representation in Xie’s work. These are the probabilistic and the postulational.
In general we can conclude that here was a distinct, if underdeveloped and
unquantiﬁed, scientiﬁc component to the understanding of the environment
in late-imperial China.

Moral versus material causation
Xie was concerned in a variety of ways with whether or not morality was a
causative force. Do we live in a natural environment interfused with morality,
or is it morally neutral? A simple case of this is the problem, Why does lightning strike where it does?
He ﬁrst explores the nature of ‘thunder’, which is taken as the basic phenomenon:135
During the Tang dynasty, in the western part of the prefecture of Daizhou136
there was a large Sophora japonica tree which was split by a thunderbolt137
for a length of several tens of feet. The God of Thunder was entrapped in
the grip of the tree and shouted wildly all day long. Everyone scattered and
no one dared to approach him. Di Renjie, who was the military governor,
came up and questioned the god, who answered: “There is a crafty dragon
in the tree who has caused this, having made me pursue him, and so fall into
this unbearable situation where I am in the grip of the tree. Were you to help
me, I would amply repay your kindness.” Di forthwith told a sawyer to
demolish the tree, whereupon the god made his escape. Now it is already
strange enough for the God of Thunder to be held fast in a tree, but that he
should speak with human beings is odder still.
He goes on to note that “usually in cases where people have seen the shape of the
God of Thunder, he has by and large resembled a rooster with ﬂeshy wings, the
sound he makes being the energetic striking of these wings.”138 This enables
him to argue that the Song-dynasty neo-Confucians’ explanation of thunder
and lightning in terms of the pattern-principles of the Dark Force and Bright
Force is “truly ridiculous” since thunder has “a form and a sound” and therefore belongs to “the category of things.”139
He then comes to the problem of whether or not a lightning strike is
morally accidental when seen from a human point of view:140
It often happens that when a thunderbolt strikes someone this has been
caused by a dragon rising up, or because the thunderbolt has risen from the

Science and Superfauna

399

ground and smitten them accidentally,141 to their misfortune. One opinion is
that when a wilful dragon is shirking his duty of making rain, he will more
often than not escape into the wall of someone’s house, or into someone’s
ear or nose, or possibly between the horns of an ox. The God of Thunder is
thus obliged to arrest him, and this often causes a clap of thunder.
There would also appear to be cases in which the strike is made with
conscious intent and is not just abandoned recklessness. . . . When I was
young and living with my grandfather, . . . the maidservant carried me in
her arms into the garden, where a thunderbolt came down and struck her.
When she ﬂed, it pursued her into the house, where it rested on top of my
cot. The maidservant was struck dead but I, the child, came to no harm.142
Xie then confronts the basic problem:143
When a thunderbolt strikes a human being, may we say that it has a
heart–mind? [That is, does it have a morally aware conscious intent?] If we
do, then how can rotten trees and livestock, which are also smitten by thunderbolts, be thought to have been guilty of a sin? If, to the contrary, we
maintain that it does not have a heart–mind, then how do we account for
the fact that those who have been recorded, both in ancient and in modern
times, as having been struck by it were all of them evildoers and unrestrained robbers? I have never yet heard of an upright man or a superior man
dying from a thunderclap.144 . . .
Only a major cause is sufﬁcient to move Heaven to wrath; but, granting
this, why should it be that not all the evildoers and unrestrained robbers in
the world have been struck down? I would answer that this is the means
whereby Heaven is Heaven. If the God of Thunder were to spend all day
booming about, searching out people and striking them down, Heaven’s
majesty would be deﬁled.
This sequence of passages provides an example of ‘rationality without facts’.
However oddly they may strike the modern reader, the logic, if not ﬂawless, is
not negligible. The factual foundations on which it rests are rubbish.
Xie, having ascribed a sort of bureaucratic causation to thunder, was
however also alert to the possibility of what we would think of as natural
patterns:145
Long ago I used to live at the foot of the Nine Immortals Hills. There was a
tallow tree146 outside the kitchen, and every year at the beginning of spring the
thunderbolts [i.e., lightning] would rise up from the side of this tree. Its
roots and branches were half burned away, and the color resembled that of
charcoal. It is said that over a period of four years thunderbolts rose up from

400

Perceptions

here four times. Thus it would also seem that the thunder lies hibernating
in speciﬁc places.
He distinguished explicitly between material and moral causation:147
Since the conjunctions and the eclipses of the sun and the moon depend on
their regular orbits, and they can be foreseen in numerical detail several tens
of years in advance, it is not possible to escape them. . . . Is it not erroneous
to point to them as portents from Heaven?
He further argued that the poor historical correlation between periods of
bad government and the occurrence of solar eclipses implied that believing
eclipses to be portents was equivalent to regarding Heaven as perverse, “like a
father ﬂogging and scolding a well-behaved son, and indulging a worthless
one.”148 Predictability had, he said, altered people’s attitudes.149 Per contra,
planetary motions and comets did have moral signiﬁcance:150
Venus is a ‘star’ associated with war. If one examines the patterns of Heaven
through successive dynasties, one ﬁnds that when Venus has dominated
Heaven, wars have arisen on a great scale, and that when comets have dominated Heaven, there have been conﬂicts over the succession to the throne.
In the early sixteenth century, after a comet had swept across the constellation
of the God of Literature, there had been a rebellion, and “disaster fell on every
high ofﬁcial.” Likewise, after a “strange star” had been seen in the southwest
late in 1577, “the imperial court was entirely emptied of upright men.” He
concludes that “celestial portents do not appear for no reason; they are as they
are because of causes.”151 Moralism just wins out over agnosticism:152
I have never seen an epoch of a Sage in which there were many disasters, nor
an age of disorder in which there were many auspicious events. Are we to
maintain then that Heaven has a conscious intent? There are also occasions
when people meet with disasters that subsequently turn to good fortune,
and with auspicious events that then become baleful.
There are cases, too, where the responses of events to disasters and good
fortune that were otherwise identical have been totally dissimilar. When
people look for the reasons for this, there is always forced interpretation, yet if
they do not look for the reasons, and assign these events entirely to chance, this
is where the [morally disruptive] theory that . . . the portents of Heaven do not
require one to fear them has its starting point. How can this be permissible?
We will return to this theme in the next chapter which looks at the religion of
the weather sponsored for a time by the Qing state.

Science and Superfauna

401

Companionship, tourism, and connoisseurship
What motivations drove Xie? At the risk of oversimplifying, we may describe
him as seeking companionship with nature, as being an intellectual tourist
forever in search of novelty, and one who relished the appraisal of the
ideas and experiences he had collected, and their placing in an appropriate
literary context. The ﬁrst aspect emerges from a discussion of happiness. After
observing that poverty and low status are not as pleasant as vulgar wisdom
had claimed them to be, he goes on: “A rough sufﬁciency of farmland
and gardens is needed for hills and vales to afford one pleasure, and for one
to be the companion of ﬁsh and shrimps by the streams, and the friend
of the deer among the mountains, to ‘plow the clouds and cast one’s ﬁshhook among the snows’, and to intone songs to the moon and hum poems
to the ﬂowers.”153
He is open about his taste for the new and unexpected: “To read books that
one has not seen before, to pass through scenery that one has not before encountered, these resemble obtaining extremely precious objects or tasting unusual
ﬂavors, being strange pleasures that are hard to convey by speech to others.”154
He liked to meditate on what he had seen and to moralize. The following
passage, which arouses thoughts of the fables of La Fontaine in the Western
reader’s mind, may suggest something of this aspect:155
The dung-beetle rolls up a pellet in which to hide its body, never failing to
laugh at the dry straws of the cicada’s bed. The spider drops her silken
threads in order to seek her prey, never failing to laugh at the silkworm
being boiled [in the vat of the silk-reeler]. Thus things being so, the pure
and the ﬁlthy have different patterns of causation, and the empathetically
concerned and the cruelly violent belong to different categories.
The superior man would therefore prefer to go hungry in order to remain
pure, rather than to stuff his stomach and become morally ﬁlthy. He would
rather bring to perfection his empathetic concern for others, even if this
means killing his own person, than give way to cruel violence in order to live
on by ignoble means.
Although most of Xie’s observations of arthropods are objective in spirit
(for example those on the Sphex wasp156 and the dragonﬂy157), he thus also
had a side that enjoyed drawing a moral from a natural spectacle. Even when
he did not do this overtly, it is hard not to suspect that his primary motive
was usually a connoisseur’s enjoyment rather than the deepening of his
understanding.

402

Perceptions

Humankind and habitat
Xie had a multifaceted interest in the relationship of human beings with their
environment. Traveling around had sharpened his sense of variations in space,
and of the differences in climate, quality of drinking-water, and people’s
health. He was aware of population pressure in some of the country’s regions
and cities, and how higher densities of population increased the spread of
epidemic disease. Also of shortages of labor in other areas. He had witnessed
reductions in accessible resources in some of China’s provinces, and the loss of
fertility in some soils. Wide reading had conferred on him a sense of changes
over long periods of time: an example is the shift he noted in the aesthetic attitude toward cultivated ﬂowers during the middle empire, which moved from
one of indifference to one of intoxication. He was aware how the built environment affected human safety and health: different urban housing materials
had different risks of ﬁre, and different sanitation arrangements different
probabilities of disease. He was intrigued by people’s reactions to the environment: their religious fascination with mountains, for instance, but also their
fear of heights. Contemplating the variety of natural conditions with which
humans had to contend, including the sea, had impressed on him that adaptation was often the price of survival.
These themes interlock. Though the passages that illustrate them approximately follow the order given above, this means that they are too entangled
with each other for the sequence to be sharply deﬁned. Incidental empirical
information abounds but some of it is of doubtful validity. The focus is on
Xie’s thinking.
We begin with population.
Xie saw the Ming dynasty as one of exceptional population growth. This
view is to some degree at variance with the current scholarly consensus,158 but
the divergence is probably to some extent due to Xie’s focusing on particular
areas, as will become clear. His overall view, though, was as follows:159
For the last two hundred and forty years the people have been at their ease
and rearing children, being unacquainted with war. The population is abundant, the result of a situation that has not existed since antiquity. For this
reason, those who do not make redoubled efforts to contrive their preparations, and who are not concerned with timing their actions aright, cannot
avoid having their plans go awry.
He is ﬂattering the dynasty, of course, and his ancient history is off target.
What is convincing, though, is his dismay at the psychological effects on
people of the intensiﬁed competition between them. A little later he says:160

Science and Superfauna

403

In Xin'an in Wu, and in Futang161 in Fujian, the land is constricted and the
population numerous. The properties of the common people have reached
everywhere, no matter how remote, and are regularly found in barren, outof-the-way corners where human feet have [previously] left no traces. There
is really something inexplicable in this. The land is so limited that the people
cannot feed themselves from it, but the population is numerous. This is
because the ways in which they are aiming to make a proﬁt extend across an
ever-broadening range.
When I was in Xin'an I saw many cases in which a further storey had been
added on top of the upper storey of people’s houses. Instances of houses
without an upper storey were rare. I estimated that the accommodation in
one of these houses could match that of two or three one-storey houses, and
there would still not be a foot or an inch of vacant space [so dense is the
population].
In Fujian province all the land, from the high hills down to the plains, has
been cut into ﬁelds. Seen from far off they look like ladders. . . . Even so, the
people roam about in small bands to pursue a living away from home. If the
land were to be allocated in accordance with the ‘well-ﬁeld’ system of antiquity,162 seventy per cent of them would be without land.
But population pressure was not universal:163
Only in Fujian and Guangdong and Guangxi is it possible to accumulate a
surplus by farming. Recently, though, the soil in Fujian has also become
badly degraded. The region south of the ranges, Guangdong and Guangxi
[the Far South], is unique in having abundant resources and a sparse population, with arable land plentiful, and rice cheap. If it were not afﬂicted by
malaria and poisonous animals, it would indeed be heaven on earth.
The normal dictionary translation of the ﬁrst sentence would be ‘accumulate
a surplus of farmland’. This leads to such obvious contradictions, both internal
and with the preceding passage, that I have emended it. Xie did, however, also
note that in much of the central Yangzi valley “rice is cheap and farmland
abundant, with not enough people to farm it.” It was to this that he attributed
the relatively egalitarian income distribution in these provinces.164 In the
Northeast he noted salinization: “As far as one can see along the coastal lands
of Shandong there are tidal salt ﬂats. They are unfarmable, and nothing
remains of the ﬁelds but the name.” The people were poverty-stricken.165 The
overall picture that emerges from his pages of the relationship between population and resources is thus that it was patchy and variable.

404

Perceptions

We have already seen in passing, in the course of his discussion of bamboos,
how Xie ascribed epidemics among human beings to a high population
density.166 A particular illustration of this was the temporary concentration of
a workforce to dredge a stretch of the Yellow River in the fall and winter of
1603. The facilitating cause of the illness was the insanitary conditions:167
Neither ﬁrewood, hay, rice, nor wheat was available along the banks of the
river. The laborers all of them brought their own clothing and food, forming
encampments on both banks. It was estimated that there were more than
three hundred thousand men. Filthy vapors rose up like steam. The dead lay
pillowed one on top of the other. Every worker who died had to be replaced
by a substitute from the same county. When spring arrived, the vapors of
the epidemic burst forth once more. From beginning to end, more than a
hundred thousand perished.
Inadequate provision for sanitation was probably one reason why such
crowded conditions were so dangerous in the cities:168
Dwellings in the Capital press closely together without any space to spare.
There is also a lot of excrement and muck in the markets. People from every
region live together in a rowdy hubbub. Flies and gnats are likewise
numerous. When the hottest season of the year comes round, it is almost
impossible to survive. If rain falls for any great length of time, ﬂooding
causes disasters. For these reasons periodic fevers, dysentery, and epidemics
follow one another constantly. The only way of safeguarding one’s health
is to sit calmly and venture out of doors as little as one can, and deal with
it thus.
The ‘periodic fevers’ were most likely malaria. The vivax species of the plasmodium only needs a temperature of 16° Celsius in which to operate.169
Disposal of human feces was a problem in Beijing. In what follows, the
term ‘privy’ refers to a storage pit, usually covered, with a crossbar or seat, for
defecating, not anything like a modern water closet:170
Although privies are foul and ﬁlthy places, the people of ancient times
attached importance to them. These days they no longer build privies north
of the Yangzi River. . . . South of the Yangzi privies are all constructed to sell
their contents to farmers. There are no wet-ﬁelds for rice north of the
Yangzi, and thus no use for feces in liquid form. They leave it on the ground
till it has dried, then mix it with soil and blend it into the ﬁelds. In the
capital it remains in trenches until the springtime, when they take it out to
dry it in the sunshine. The vapors coming off it are so foul that one cannot
go near it. Anyone who suffers invasive contact from them falls sick.

Science and Superfauna

405

Elsewhere he comments, when discussing the making of tea, that “north of the
Yangzi it is not appropriate to use rainwater, as the tiles on the rooves of the
houses are mostly made of clay mixed with shit.”171
Xie’s depiction of the ﬁlthy condition of the cities of his day contrasts
markedly with the laudatory account given by the Jesuits a century-and-a-half
later, and presented in the “Concluding Remarks” (p. 468). We will ﬁnd ourselves
faced with a puzzle at this point: had conditions changed, or were the standards
of judgment different?
Xie believed that people in remote areas tended to live longer than in those
more economically developed (and chapter 9 on Zunhua conﬁrms this insight). In the course of his discussion of ginseng he comments:172
At the present time, commoners who dwell deep in the hills or in desolate
valleys, eat herbs and coarse vegetables, having no knowledge of what a
medical drug might be, enjoy long lives with robust bodies, and are unacquainted with acute illnesses. Only in the families of those who are well-todo or of high status, where the everyday behavior of the sons, younger
brothers, and women lacks restraint, and their times of eating and resting are
not well harmonized, do they rely on the effects of treatment with ginseng.
Wild plants were healthier than their domesticated counterparts for similar
reasons:173
Mei-plums, cassia, and orchids cultivated by human beings with great effort
are, in the last analysis, inferior to those that grow of their own accord in the
mountains. The reason that this is so is that these latter receive the seminal
essences of the sun and moon, and the vitality of the winds and frosts, and
also are not in the vicinity of smoke or cities. They bestow their fragrances
of their own accord, with an unstressed demeanor in a setting that suits
them. This is why the sinews and bones of people brought up in rich and
distinguished families are commonly more fragile than those of the poor
and humble.
Human beings were affected by climate:174
There are places afﬂicted by cold at the frontier passes where, if one spits,
one’s spittle at once freezes. In some of the swelteringly hot areas in the far
south if one does not dry one’s clothing in the sunshine and the wind, it
goes moldy with the damp. The climatic aethers of Heaven and Earth are
thus not uniform.
It is better for southerners to go north than the reverse, since when northerners come south, if they don’t suffer from malaria they will from dysentery. Cold is bearable, but not heat. When I was in the north, I did not suffer

406

Perceptions

from the cold but from the dust. In the south I do not suffer from the heat
but from the humidity. Dust makes things ﬁlthy—white garments turning
black as a result. Humidity affects human beings: powerful bodies become
rheumatic.
Adaptation to local variations in climate was normal. Speaking of the windblown dust that obscured vision in the Northeast, he says “when people from the
lower Yangzi valley ﬁrst arrive, they ﬁnd it vexing, but the locals are not in the
least put out by it.”175 The most dramatic illustration of the difference between
those adapted and those not adapted was seasickness. He had witnessed this
when accompanying his paternal grandfather to the Liuqiu islands:176
Even those who live on the water, and are also used to being submerged in it,
if they are not accustomed to crossing the sea, become dizzy and vomit when
they go aboard a ship, and sprawl about this way and that. All the envoys had
hammocks in their quarters which permitted the ship to roll while the bed
remained level. Even so they were still dizzy and disturbed, unable either
to eat or drink This was because on the boundless waste there is no day
when the wind does not blow, and no moment when there are not waves.
The built environment also varied:177
Disasters from ﬁres are uniquely frequent in Fujian province, but the places
worst affected are Jianning and my own home prefecture of Fuzhou. One
reason for this is that the people’s houses converge like spokes on a hub, and
they work at night without resting [so the oil lamps are a hazard]. A second
reason is that their construction is based on a uniﬁed wooden framework.
Bricks and masonry are no longer used. If ever anyone is careless [and knocks
over a lamp], there is nothing to stop the power of the conﬂagration. . . .
North of the Yangzi River, the walls of people’s houses are made of earth
or glazed tiles. They hold their thatch together with mud. Even if a ﬁre breaks
out, it will not burn, or, if it does break out, will not spread. This does not only
apply to north of the Yangzi. Even in the Fujianese prefectures of Xinghua
and Quanzhou extensive use is made of bricks, and ﬁres are infrequent.
It is worth noting that there was still enough wood in some places along the
southeast coast for houses to be routinely built of it. Building in wood had
other drawbacks, however. Xie says of the Far South: “After time has passed a
house will be bored through [by termites], and commodities will rot. There are
no houses a hundred years old, nor any books that are ﬁfty years old, nor again
any clothes that are twenty years old.”178 At times, typhoons could ﬂatten
houses. He says of the severe storms that ravaged the coast of the Far South
once every three to ﬁve years:179

Science and Superfauna

407

When one erupts, the roof tiles of the village dwellings, and the trees in the
groves, over a distance of more than a hundred kilometers will be as if
washed away. Boats and their oars are tossed about, pounded totally into
fragments. Several days before the storm arrives, the locals will be aware of
it and take precautions to avoid its effects. All the large mansions install tree
trunks edged with iron as pillars, and bronze or iron plates as tiles, as a
defense against damage.
I have myself, in a typhoon that hit Hong Kong in 1965, seen massive billets of
wood blown off housetops like matchsticks, quite enough to despatch anyone
foolish enough to venture outside and unlucky enough to be hit by one.
Xie was interested in other people’s responses to the environment. One facet
was fear. He comments that “in a lifetime of roaming around the mountains,
I would regard Mountain Goat Gorge on Fangguang Peak180 as the most
perilous point.” He continues:181
When one looks upward, one ﬁnds oneself up against a sheer cliff-wall.
When one gazes down, it is bottomless. No creepers afford a handhold on
which to haul oneself up. The track is only a little over a foot in width and,
what is more, slopes outward and is splattered by the waterfall. The uneven
footholds are slippery with moss. The moment one reaches it and gives a
sideways glance, one’s courage has already disappeared. I once went in a
party of some six or seven people composed of friends and serfs, but only
one of the young serfs went across. He was barely able to make his way back,
and his face was drained of any human coloring.182
Another emotion that intrigued him was the popular passion for pilgrimages
up mountains. He gives the following acerbic account of that up Taishan, the
Great Mountain, in Shandong:183
All the commoners north of the Yangzi River, from the northeast, northwest,
and the southern part of this region, go to the Great Mountain to offer
incense. Their adherence to a vegetarian diet and other taboos, their
correctly adjusted clothing, feelings of reverence, and singleminded determination appear spontaneously identical. Even married women from the
villages and rustics from the hills abstain from meat and recite the name of
the Buddha, as if He were watching over them from above. “Any lack of
purity,” they declare, “will occasion acute illness, and the disaster of
tumbling down head over heels.”
Once the prayers and worship have been concluded, however, and they
are descending from the mountain lodges on the return journey, they will
stop somewhere with their relatives and friends, and every one of them

408

Perceptions

abandon their vegetarian diet and butcher animals in large numbers. They
will dance drunkenly about and make a noisy clamor. Effeminate boys will
sing them songs in which no indecency is spared. Now! Since they are incapable of leading a morally proper everyday life or showing a respectful
restraint once the ceremonies are over, their observance of taboos and repetition of the Buddha’s name are no more than deceptions toward the numinous powers.
But, one wonders, was there not—even so—some profound impulse drawing
these folk up the mountain in the ﬁrst place? Whatever may have happened once
the tension was released. . . . The contrast with Xie’s own self-conscious savvy
governing-class connoisseurship is not necessarily entirely to his advantage:184
If one goes touring in the mountains and does not make use of one’s ofﬁcial
underlings, there is no way to pay for cooks or palanquin carriers. However,
if these underlings come on tour in the mountains with one, this is also
exceedingly discommoding. One reason for this is that, if one has a large
number of attendants, one cannot be one’s natural self. A second is that the
complexities of the commissariat will occasion this, that, and the other
anxiety. A third reason is that the yelling of those clearing the way in front and
bringing up the rear ruin the scenery, and it is doubly difﬁcult when one is
rigged out in one’s formal clothing to strip off garments or go barefoot.
Palanquin carriers and attendants shrink from traveling anywhere
remote. The Daoist priests and Buddhist monks are solely concerned with
having done as quickly as possible with roads through dangerous places. It
is a cause of worry that the porters will grumble at unusual and perilous
scenery, and, fearing to get into difﬁculties, will only lead each other down
paths that they are already accustomed to. One will not manage to visit even
ten or twenty per cent of the subtler scenic delights.
This is why those who go touring in the mountains should depend on
landowners who share their tastes, or superior monks who live in seclusion. . . . Go where you feel inclined! If a place is off to one side, nothing is
gained by failing to visit it. . . . Take your time. Don’t hurry. Prefer
difﬁculties to taking it easy. Prefer to do things thoroughly, but don’t feel
obliged to do so. Don’t become bored halfway through. Don’t bring along
too many friends. If there are a lot of them, they will be interested in
different things. Don’t be too stingy with food and supplies. If you are, then
enthusiasm, after being aroused, will falter midway. Regularly encourage the
enterprising spirit of your capable and experienced serfs. . . . Don’t take a
drunkard along. Don’t have someone in an enfeebled condition as a
companion. Whenever you come to a point of scenic transition where it is

Science and Superfauna

409

necessary to engage in its appreciation, set out your writing-brush and
inkstone to prepare notes that will stop you forgetting it.
These are the broad essentials of touring in the mountains.
Eminently reasonable. And depressingly uninspired. The contrast with Xie
Lingyun’s feeling for the landscape a millennium earlier, or the intense
philosophic and competitive enthusiasm of the early European conquerors of
the Alps, sums up one aspect of the shift from the aristocratic to the bureaucratic soul.
The response to ﬂowers underwent a long-term change of a different kind.
In Xie’s view, “the people of ancient times seem not to have paid attention to
ﬂowering plants. The poets then sang only of such things as plantains, the
common mouse-ear, Marsilia quadrifolia, and white artemisia.”185 He further
comments that:186
From time to time they touched on peaches, li-plums, cherries, peonies, and
lotus buds. As for mei-plums and cassia, they only considered them useful
as culinary ﬂavorings, for titivating the taste buds. Initially they did not
allude to their fragrances. It can hardly have been the case that at this time
these latter two trees were not to be found in the northwest or the north
China plain, seeing they used both of them as dried or fresh fruits!
Chrysanthemums were only referred to in the poem “Encountering Sorrow”
in The Compositions of Chu as something to be eaten, not as a source of visual
pleasure. The author was “not yet an intimate friend of chrysanthemums.” As
for peonies, “the people of ancient times likewise thought of them as seasoning
for food. If someone were to act in this way today, he would greatly damage the
scenery!”187
This situation had changed around the middle of the ﬁrst millennium ce:188
Peonies were not exalted with praise before the Tang dynasty. Only in the
works of Xie Lingyun do we ﬁnd a line like: “Among bamboos, by the river’s
bank, grow peonies in throngs.” He was the ﬁrst close friend of this sovereign among ﬂowers. . . .
When [a century-and-a-half later] Emperor Yang of the Sui had a site
cleared for his Western Park, the department of Yizhou presented him with
twenty-four species of peony. These included the ‘Brownish Earth-Red’, the
‘Blushing Red’, and the ‘Fly Hither Red’. How foolishly besotted he was! . . .
By the Kaiyuan reign-period [713–41 ce] the peony had little by little come
to be highly prized.
Symbolic ﬂowers proliferate in “Encountering Sorrow,” which was written long
before this time, toward the end of the preimperial era, and include species

410

Perceptions

described as planted, tended, and raised. If there really was, then, a long-term
historic change such as Xie asserts, it was a subtler one than he intimates.
Perhaps it could be more precisely formulated as the intensifying aestheticization of cultivated ﬂowers.
In later times, he says of mei-plums:189
Men of superior attainments and littérateurs have sung their praises one
after the other without stopping. Their viewpoint, which ﬁnds pleasure in
the blossoms but forgets the fruit, is exactly the opposite of that of people
of ancient times.
There is an implication here of the aristocratic or mandarinal superiority of
being able to afford to admire what is, in any direct sense, useless. Xie goes on:
There are places in Fujian, Zhejiang, and the lower Yangzi region where the
blossoms of the mei-plums can be seen stretching without a break for ﬁve
or six kilometers. They are all however grown by uncultivated rustics and
merely for the purpose of selling the fruit. In the season when they are in
blossom, people suffer from the cold and shiver in the wind. There is snow
in the hill valleys. How could commonplace people endure this? Those who
grow the mei-plums are not necessarily those who delight in them. Those
who delight in them are not always those who grow them. Mei-plums differ
in this respect from other ﬂowering plants.
Some ﬂowers did indeed generate popular enthusiasm. An example was the
magnolia, of the species denudata or conspicua:190
In Nanjing they are to be found at the Bounds of Heaven Temple, and in
Suzhou at Tiger Mound Hill. Every year, when they open, they are considered
a delight quite out of the ordinary. The matrons who frequent the pagodas in
monastery grounds choke up the thoroughfares. One looks all round one but
sees no end to these people, one’s head growing dizzy from the ferocious stench
they emit.
Some wild ﬂowers were, however, at least in his view, universally neglected. He
says of the Daphne odora, a shrub with pale purple blossoms that open early
in the year: “I would describe it as a rare plant of the mountain valleys that is
not restricted to being unknown in the cities. Even those who live in the
mountains neither know of it nor take delight in it.”191
Environment was critical for the well-being of ﬂowers:192
North of Fujian province, peonies are to be found everywhere, but are most
plentiful in Shandong and He'nan. . . . When I passed along the road
through Puzhou and Caonan, their fragrance assaulted my nostrils for ﬁfty

Science and Superfauna

411

kilometers. This was because everyone there grows them in garden plots,
like vegetables.
The reason that peonies could not be successfully transferred to Fujian was in
a sense the mirror-image of the reason why lichee trees and long'an trees could
not go north of Zhejiang.193 Climatic preference.
Why then did the self-conscious appreciation of cultivated ﬂowers begin to
increase so rapidly in China around the middle of the ﬁrst millennium ce, and
remain so strong for so long afterward? Xie offers some ﬂeeting clues.194 He
begins by asking:
On how many occasions in human life, in the course of a hundred years of
looking at ﬂowers, are one’s feelings and the scenery in a joyful concord, and
one’s senses extended to the utmost?
For himself, he answers, only twice. He describes the ﬁrst of these moments as
follows. Caonan was a hilly area in the southwest of Shandong. Peony country.
At the home of a ﬁrst-degree holder in Caonan I saw a garden of peonies
that may have been more than three-and-a-half hectares in extent, entirely
covered with these ﬂowers. Apart from the pavilions and kiosks, there was
hardly a foot or an inch of ground to spare. A cloud-like brocade of every
color made an arresting sight as far as the eye could see. Our host sang in a
reﬁned style, played [the ancient game of] pitchpot with arrows, and let his
guests go where they felt inclined, not shaming us with the commonplace
rituals of host and guest. That night was brilliant with a pure white moon,
as bright as the daytime. We exclaimed out loud with pleasure, and our
humorous badinage ﬂowed without cease. Not till dawn did we go home.
The scents lingered on my clothing for several days without disappearing.
Cultivated ﬂowers had become participants in social life.
The second episode goes deeper. It suggests that the psychology of ﬂowerviewing involved a tension. Xie was a guest at a party in what he styles
‘Chang'an’, the old name for Xi'an when the city had been the imperial capital
under the Han and the Tang. His hosts were an unnamed ofﬁcial family of
high status. The focus was a display of several hundred bowls of chrysanthemums, regimented with exceptional discipline into patterns of constant height
and alternating colors. There was singing and dancing, with “effeminate boys
moving easily and elegantly among them,” as well as the chance to admire
paintings, ancient vessels—presumably bronzes and ceramics—and musical
instruments and books. At the same time, he comments, “we did not talk of
commonplace matters,” and “although we were among decorated balustrades
and vermilion archways, there was, without a word being spoken, the effect of

412

Perceptions

‘the hedge to the east and the southern hills’.”195 They evoked the profound but
perpetually elusive meaning hidden in the nature before our eyes.
The ﬂowers were a horticultural zoo. Their deepest appeal was to an instinctive remembrance of the lost world of human interaction with an untransformed and almost independent nature. At the same time they exempliﬁed
and celebrated the taming and reshaping of this nature by humankind. Their
beauty was a triumph of reﬁned artiﬁciality under affectionate but uncompromising control. From our perspective the long-term rise of the love of
cultivated ﬂowers is indirect evidence of the domestication of the natural
world in China with which it ran parallel in time, a sophisticated substitute for
daily contact with, if one dares use the phrase, ‘the real thing’.

12
Imperial Dogma and Personal
Perspectives
There was no one view of nature that can be called the ‘Chinese’ view. There
was not even a spectrum. Rather a kaleidoscope of fragments most of which
reﬂected something of most of the other fragments. The demonstration of this
for the ﬁnal centuries of the empire is the task of the present chapter. It falls
into two contrasting parts: the imperial ideology and the multiple personal
perspectives of poetry. Considerable investments in prestige and publicity in
ofﬁcial circles went for about a century into maintaining the state orthodoxy,
but it seems to have had a surprisingly limited impact. The poets, most of
whom were either ofﬁcials themselves or from the ofﬁcial classes, seem to have
been barely if at all touched by it in their personal writings.
The ﬁrst part of what follows is a sketch of the dogmas of moral meteorology enthusiastically espoused by the Manchu–Qing rulers until around the
middle of the eighteenth century, though much less so thereafter. That is, the
doctrine that people were responsible for their weather. Rainfall and sunshine
were deemed to be seasonable or unseasonable, appropriate or excessive,
according to whether human behavior was moral or immoral. The effects were
statistical. Bad individuals in a community could beneﬁt from the goodness of
the majority; good individuals could suffer if the majority were evil. Some
counted for more than others. The emperor’s conduct was of pre-eminent
importance; bureaucrats came in second place; and the common people
ranked last. But all, or any, of these could be decisive in a particular case.
Further, since weather was mostly regional there was a corresponding regionality of rewarded or sanctioned behavior; and the weather around the capital
was thought to have particular relevance to what Heaven thought of the
emperor’s conduct. The ideology was a political tool, distinctive for its

414

Perceptions

structured rationality interwoven with a rationalized political opportunism on
the part of the ruler, who could utilize the modesty of self-reproach implicitly
to highlight his own awe-inspiring ethical qualities, or else cast blame on
others either to damn them or discipline them. Also remarkable for its at least
intermittent efforts to discover an empirically observable correlation between
morals and rainfall.
The second part surveys an ad hoc anthology of poems touching on the
environment put together from The Qing Bell of Poesy. This collection of verses
was edited by Zhang Yingchang, an ofﬁcial who served in the Grand Secretariat, and published in 1869, originally as The Bell of Poesy of the Present
Dynasty. It contains over 2,000 poems, the work of 911 poets, mostly on topics
that relate to everyday life. They are of uneven quality. Some are profoundly
beautiful; many are doggerel. But they illustrate a medley of conﬂicting
themes. The romance of economic development. The disaster of economic
exploitation. The limitless stores of the earth’s bounty. The exhaustion of
natural resources. Uncompromising war on nature. Dexterous cooperation
with nature. Respect for nature. Mystical absorption into it. Landscape as a
human body, fecund but vulnerable. Landscape as a playground for the deities
of the seas, rivers, storms, and earthquakes. Environment as the molder of the
human character. The aethers dominating a landscape as a legacy created by
people’s past behavior in it. Nature as the mirror and symbol of mankind and
its activities. The indifference of nature, living its own story. . . . And so on.
Perhaps the only thing all these beliefs had in common was that in some
sense everything in the environment was felt to be alive, whether with a
natural or a supernatural life.

Moral meteorology
The roots of meteorological ideology in China were archaic. The ode Yun Han
declared of a drought: “The king says, ‘Alas! what guilt rests on the present
men? Heaven sends down death and disorder, famine comes repeatedly’.”1
The section called ‘The various conﬁrmations’ in the ‘Great Plan’ chapter of
the Scripture of Documents lists rain, ﬁne weather, warmth, cold, winds, and
their timeliness, or lack of it, as ‘conﬁrmations’ caused by the good or bad
conduct of the ruler.2 Under the Later Han dynasty, a natural disaster like
drought could also be explained in terms of a lack of yin, and measures taken
to increase the power of this principle, as by sacriﬁcing to mountains and
rivers, and freeing innocent prisoners.3 Xiang Kai could write at this time of
“repeated frosts and hail, and . . . heavy rains and thunderstorms” as being

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

415

“caused by subjects who ﬂaunt their personal power, and by punishments that
are excessively cruel.”4
The main sources used for the analysis presented here are the sections on
‘Reverence for Heaven’ in the so-called ‘Sacred Instructions’ of the Manchu
emperors from Kangxi to Daoguang.5 These pose several problems. Different
rulers had different personalities, hence different preferences and practices.
During a long reign there could also be changes of importance within the
reign itself. An example is the Qianlong Emperor’s sponsorship of public
ceremonies for rain by Daoists and Buddhists in the 1780s and 1790s, something that he had not done before.6 Some emperors probably engaged in
moral posturing.7 We have also to bear in mind the caveat formulated by Rafe
de Crespigny for an earlier age: “Portents recorded in the histories do not
reﬂect the disorders of nature so well as they do the discontents and political
disagreements of man.”8 The hypermoralizing and omen-besotted Yongzheng
may have been uneasy at the continuing belief that his succession was not
legitimate, and sought to emphasize both the closeness of his relationship
with Heaven and his trembling humility before It.9 The selection of the materials included is also presumably biased: thus occasions when rain resulted
from an emperor’s prayers are probably overrepresented as compared to the
occasions when it did not.
Clearly, though, the publicly announced beliefs that the documents describe
would not have been set forth in imperial decrees, where the prestige of the
emperor was both the guarantor of their authenticity and a hostage to their
plausibility, had they not commanded a substantial measure of assent,
however formalistic in nature. Even seemingly trivial violations of ritual could
have unfortunate consequences: In 1747 an ofﬁcial sacriﬁcing at the Altar of
Heaven had a headache and squatted down. For this irreverence he was at once
impeached.10 These doctrines were an ideological exoskeleton that helped hold
the political system in place. But probably not an endoskeleton.11
Seen in the perspective of environmental history, perhaps only in an area
such as northern China could a belief in moral meteorology have maintained
a hold on people’s convictions. The reason is that the weather here in lateimperial times, if the modern record may be taken as an approximate guide,12
was very variable over the short term. Probably only high short-term variability
can provide enough short-term coincidences—such as apparent responses to
prayers—to sustain belief in the moral-meteorological mechanism. The
weather in central and south China was stabler.13
At least two Qing emperors, Kangxi and Yongzheng, adopted a quasiscientiﬁc attitude to the veriﬁcation by observation of moral-meteorological
causality. Kangxi declared in an edict of 1678 that, “If human affairs go amiss

416

Perceptions

down here below, then the response of Heaven Above will be as swift as [that
of] a shadow or an echo. How can one say that this has not been checked by
examination?”14 On another occasion, when there had been an earthquake, he
said, “We pondered hard within the palace on the causes of the disaster, and
strenuously sought some way to dispel them.”15
Two types of problem thus arose. First, how were the moral causes of meteorological phenomena to be identiﬁed, especially as some celestial phenomena,
notably eclipses, were predictable in advance? Kangxi, for example, maintained
that, as a result of the rapacity of the ofﬁcials, “The grieved and resentful
matter–energy–vitality of the humble folk rises up to Heaven, and thereby
causes ﬂoods, droughts, changes in sun, moon, stars, and planets, and uncanny
events such as earthquakes and springs running dry.”16
Second, how was religious or philosophical sense to be made of Heaven’s
behavior? To us it would seem that obvious questions were usually avoided.
Why, in the circumstances just described by Kangxi, should Heaven have
responded to the people’s woes by making them worse? Sometimes, however,
the questions were at least raised, if not answered. Qianlong wrote a prayer
in which he declared, “The fault is not with the ofﬁcials, or with the common
people, but with your minister [the emperor himself being the ‘minister’ of
Heaven], and grows worse daily.” He followed this by asking, rhetorically no
doubt, “How can Heaven Above, on account of the person of this one
minister [that is, himself] cause the multitudes of common people to be
afﬂicted by disaster?”17
There was tension between the spiritual approach to the world of
suprahuman powers and what may be called ‘religious technology’, especially
folk technology when it escaped from imperial control. This is evident from a
decree issued by the Yongzheng emperor in 1725 about the worship of a
proscribed deity, Liu Meng:18
Li Weijun, the governor-general of Zhili, memorialized last year: “There
have been disasters from locusts everywhere in the metropolitan area. The
locals who have prayed devoutly in the temples of General Liu Meng19 have
not suffered harm from them.” We were acutely pained at this. The practice
of all matters that are of beneﬁt to the livelihood of the people should be
widely disseminated. The recognized spirits who ward off disasters are,
moreover, listed in the sacriﬁcial rituals. . . . The people of old likewise did
not refrain from making use of the powers of spirits to drive away disaster
caused by locusts.20 Chabina, the governor-general of the Liang-Jiang, has
now stated in a memorial: “Those localities in Jiangnan that have erected
temples to General Liu Meng have no disasters due to locusts, whereas in
places that have not yet erected such temples they are not able to be free of

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

417

locusts.” This shows the warped narrowness of Chabina’s views. He suspects
that We rely exclusively on prayers as a method of dispelling catastrophes.
Many of the other governors-general and governors have also said in their
memorials that they have established ways to pray for rain or sunshine.
Now . . . disasters arising from ﬂoods, droughts, or locusts are due either
to a defect in the government at Court, . . . or to the chief ofﬁcials in the area
being unable to serve the state in a fair and correct fashion, . . . or else again
the low moral quality of customs in some particular prefecture or county,
where people’s heart–minds are false and treacherous, thereby causing the
Dark Force and Bright Force to be thrown into confusion, so that disasters
are numerous and repeated. . . .
When We heard that . . . rain and ﬁne weather were occurring out of
season, We were obliged deeply to reform Ourselves and reﬂect on the
correction of Our faults, being attentive and fearful morning and evening,
in the hope of regaining Heaven’s [benevolent] attention. You senior
provincial ofﬁcials and local ofﬁcials, as well as common folk, should in like
fashion be fearful, and examine your moral character. . . . As for praying to
the daemonic beings21 and spirits, this is only a means whereby one attains
a single-mindedly devoted heart–mind. If one relies exclusively on prayer as
a method of dispelling disasters, and pays no attention to fearfulness and
moral self-examination, this is inevitably like ‘dredging a watercourse but
neglecting the spring’. . . . We are in no wise deluded by the vulgar custom
of shamanistic prayers to daemonic beings and spirits.
The emperor accepts religious technology at a vulgar level in principle,
provided that it is within imperially prescribed bounds, but tries to give it a
higher meaning. It is not currying favor with a lesser deity that brings results,
but having a heart whose moral qualities ﬁnd favor with Heaven.
The earliest decrees of Nurhaci, the founder of the Qing, were designed to
establish that he was the Son of Heaven and aided by Heaven in his ‘great
enterprise’. In 1626 he hinted at the tenets of moral meteorology.22 Huangtaiji,
his successor, who was uneasy at the siniﬁcation and softening of the
Manchus, only spoke about the weather and natural disasters in practical
terms. In 1637, faced with the possibility of more poor harvests due to a
second cold spring in succession, he simply told the Board of Finance to
mobilize the base-level military leaders since “if plowing and weeding are
done in good time, the crops will not be harmed by disasters.”23 In 1644,
inveighing against addiction to alcohol among lower-level ofﬁcers, which had
in turn led to poverty among their rank and ﬁle, he asked if these latter were
not just as much the subjects of the dynasty as their commanders, adding,

418

Perceptions

“Does Heaven send down the ill-omened disasters of frost, hail, drought, and
ﬂoods only on them?”24
Doctrinal moral meteorology only appeared in Qing decrees in 1653 with
the Shunzhi emperor. Faced with ﬂoods in the capital, where houses had been
destroyed, and food and ﬁrewood had become expensive for poor people, he
declared that this “has been caused by Our lack of virtue,” and promised to
reform himself. In 1656, he issued a longer edict which combined ritual selfaccusation with shifting the blame onto his regent predecessor:25
Since We assumed personal rule . . . there has been thunder in winter, snow
in the spring, meteorites, and rainfalls of earth. One can see such communication everywhere, for untoward events do not occur for no reason. They
have all been caused by Our lack of virtue. . . . There have now been successive years of ﬂoods and droughts, and the common people are having
difﬁculty in making a living. This is because We have failed the expectations
of Heaven Above of one who acts as a ruler. . . .
When Prince Rui [Dorgon] was regent,26 those who surrendered were
massacred, rewards were distributed without restraint, the loyal and the
good were driven from ofﬁce, the greedy and the treacherous employed, and
the wealth of the State recklessly wasted, so causing the common people to
sigh with resentment. Everyone looked forward to the day when We
assumed personal rule and would swiftly afford them succor. Six years have
now passed, and although We have made every effort to pursue a renovation
. . . disasters and ill omens are frequently seen. In this case We have failed the
common people’s hopes for good government.
By implication, the weather here is still solely a matter between Heaven and
the ruler.
A wider-ranging theory of causation was formulated in the Kangxi reign
that followed. There were two somewhat distinct modes. (1) The sincerity of
the spiritual attitude with which Heaven was approached was critical for
“reaching upward, and by affect attaining the heart–mind of Heaven.” A bad
attitude could ‘summon’ disasters from on high. (2) Cruel, ill-judged, or illmotivated actions by the government and its ofﬁcials generated resentful
matter–energy–vitality among the ruled, and this acted as a material force that
“upward did violence to the harmony of Heaven.” These two modes may be
illustrated by passages from three decrees:
(1) 1678
If human affairs go awry in this world below, there will be corresponding
changes in Heaven above. . . . It is now the height of summer; the weather is
hot and dry; rain-fed moisture is not easy to come by. . . . The sprouts of

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

419

grain are hanging down dried out. . . . We have on this account directed.
Our efforts toward reﬂecting upon the reformation of Our character, practicing abstinence, and devoutly praying for sweet and prolonged rain, Our
hope being that Our quintessential single-mindedness will reach upwards,
and affect the heart–mind of Heaven. . . . 27
(2) 1679
There has now occurred a large and sudden earthquake. The general explanation for this is that We are lacking in virtue . . . and that many of those whom
We have employed to administer the government are not sincere or helpful.
Central and provincial ofﬁcials, you are unable to purify your heart–minds,
. . . you deceive your superiors, act in your personal interests . . . or behave
wantonly and oppress the people, turning right and wrong upside down, . . .
disrupting the harmony of Heaven above, and calling down this disaster.28
(3) 1679
The difﬁculties faced by the common people in making a living have
become extreme. . . . Families without food or clothing have been coming
into the Capital in uncountable numbers to sell their children at cheap
prices. . . . This is all because the local ofﬁcials have toadied to the higher
ofﬁcials, and imposed unauthorized levies on the common people. The governors-general, provincial governors, and intendants pass on [these pickings]
in the form of presents to those in the Capital. The great ofﬁcials thus
transfer the limited material output to which Heaven can give birth, and the
easily exhausted wealth of the people, into the private pockets of greedy
bureaucrats. The aggrieved and resentful matter–energy–vitality of the people
of modest means reaches up to Heaven, thereby causing the summoning forth
of such untoward events as ﬂoods, droughts, changes in the heavenly bodies,
earthquakes, and the drying up of springs.29
The precarious credibility of the ﬁrst mode (sincerity) was well appreciated by
the Kangxi emperor. Thus in 1708 he said that he had formerly prayed to the
Supreme God30 for relief from drought. On the day that he went to the Altar of
Heaven “it was immediately apparent that Our feelings had touched Him, for
timely rain fell copiously, and We then knew that Our deep and lonely singleminded sincerity had found its reﬂection in Heaven Above.” When later there
was another drought, his ofﬁcials pressed him to pray again for rain, but he
refused, saying: “The empire is now prosperous. We fear that Our singleminded sincerity is not what it was on the previous occasion. . . . One ought
not to engage in prayer light-heartedly.”31
Morality-based theories lost plausibility when a phenomenon could be
predicted by calculation, as was the case for eclipses of the sun and moon,

420

Perceptions

something that some Chinese thinkers had realized for at least a century.32 For
Kangxi it was, however, axiomatic that “the Way of Heaven is related to human
affairs.” In 1682 he observed that “If a comet is seen above, there are always
deﬁciencies in political matters.”33 He was aware, though, of the problem
regarding eclipses, since in 1697 he responded to a prediction from the Board
of Astronomy34 as follows:35
Although human beings can predict solar eclipses in advance, yet, from
ancient times, sovereigns have all regarded them as warnings to be fearful.
The general explanation for this is that reforming human affairs is how one
shows reverence for portents from Heaven. Only commonplace rulers
ascribe them to matter–energy–vitality and numerical parameters. Last year
there were ﬂoods and earthquakes. Now there is going to be an eclipse of the
sun. The signiﬁcance of this is undoubtedly that it will be caused by a
preponderance of yin. How can it be maintained that it is not connected with
the doings of humankind?
He later tried to consolidate his position by arguing that the historical record
showed that rulers who had treated celestial phenomena as warnings had
“long enjoyed Great Peace,” while those who had treated them as “accidental”
had fallen into decline.
The Yongzheng emperor reiterated the formulae promulgated by his father,
but reﬁned the philosophy behind them. He also introduced two novelties.
The ﬁrst was the concept of the statistical nature of moral-meteorological
phenomena; the second a rough-and-ready decision procedure for determining
whether their causation was at a local or a national level. We shall deal with
this second innovation later, and turn now to look at the ﬁrst.
His central position is expressed in his response to a report in 1724 from the
provincial authorities of Jiangsu and Zhejiang on irruptions by the sea at the
mouth of the Yangzi River and in Hangzhou Bay:36
It is Our opinion that within Heaven and Earth there are only the patternprinciples of the Five Phases of Matter. It is by these means that human
beings are born, and all beings grow and are nourished. The controllers of
the Five Phases are none other than the Dark Force and the Bright Force.
The ‘Dark Force’ and ‘Bright Force’ are other names for the daemonic beings
and the spirits. . . .
How does the Way of the Spirits establish correct doctrine? The general
explanation is that the activities of daemonic beings and spirits are, precisely,
the pattern-principles of Heaven and Earth. It is not possible that they
should act in arbitrary fashion. Everything, be it as small as a hillock or a

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

421

mound, or immense as a river or great mountain, contains a spirit in it,
which is its master. All of them must therefore be reverently believed in and
honored with service.
The sea is the destination to which the four great rivers ﬂow. If it is
thought to be unworthy of reverence, why did the [ancient] sovereigns Yao
and Shun sacriﬁce to mountains and streams? . . . The common people of
today are, in their ignorance, unaware of this pattern-principle. They often
believe in sacriﬁces for which there is no justiﬁcation, and have no faith in
the Spirits Bright. They lack respect and blaspheme, so provoking a reprimand from Heaven.
Now, if good people are numerous, and bad people few in number, then
Heaven will send down good fortune upon them. Even if there are a certain
number who are not good, they too will receive Its protection. If bad people
are in the majority and good people in the minority, then Heaven will send
down punishments upon them. Even those who are good will be affected by
Its calamities.
The authorities in Jiangnan have recently reported that the sea has
ﬂooded in everywhere in Shanghai and Chongming. The Zhejiang authorities have also reported that . . . the sea has broken through the defensive
dikes, damaging the crops in the ﬁelds. . . . Although disasters from water
pertain to Heaven-determined parameters, some cases may result from
people living close to the sea, and enjoying a peaceful prosperity, failing to
remember the efforts of the Spirits Bright to protect them, and so being
insolent and blasphemous.
Now, reverence for the spirits is appropriate in principle; and it is moreover the way in which good fortune is to be pursued and disaster
avoided. . . .
The state of mind of human beings is the state of mind of the spirits. The
moving effect of a single thought is enough in itself to bring about good
fortune. How could it only be that a single rural district, or a single family,
receives its beneﬁt? If every member of the common people can maintain
his or her heart–mind in a state of reverent fear, it is certain they will obtain
perpetual good luck and peaceful waves [on their sea].
And he ordered that the coastal population be made acquainted with this
decree.
Human beings and spiritual beings were conceived of as interacting in a
mind-ﬁeld whose components determined the actions of the corresponding
material components of every entity in the universe. The nonhuman part of
this mind-ﬁeld was constrained in certain ways by its own inherent character,
and obliged to react in a speciﬁc fashion to a speciﬁc stimulus. Human beings,

422

Perceptions

though subordinate, and required to be reverent and fearful, were the independent variable, possessing a free will. Thus in 1729 Yongzheng said that “the
rewards and retributions for good and for evil are all to be seen in the choices
that a person makes for him- or herself.37 It is like sowing seeds. If one sows
panicled millet, panicled millet will grow. It is also like striking an instrument:
if one hits metal, there will be a metallic sound, and if a stone, then a stony
sound.”38
In a decree of 1731 the emperor touched on the other side of this position,
namely that there were some things that it was impossible for Heaven to do:39
Since the middle of the summer of this year, the fertilizing rains have not
come to the Capital at the right season. . . . Heaven Above has a loving
heart–mind. It is in no way the case that there is some pattern-principle
whereby It sends down disasters on humankind [undeservedly]. The people
of the empire bring ﬂoods, droughts, and famines on themselves. . . . If any of
them should chance to develop feelings of resentment, their offense is
greater still. . . . If they have the audacity to feel resentment and hatred
against Heaven [for Its just punishments and warnings], then a perverse
matter–energy–vitality will take form from the outside. Even if Heaven
Above wishes to be lenient, this will be impossible.
Conversely, if the common people were without sins, they would never be
placed in circumstances from which they could not escape.
The statistical nature of moral-meteorological effects, which apply only to
groups of people, and not to individuals,40 becomes intelligible in terms of the
collective nature of the mind-ﬁeld. It also solves an ancient religious problem,
why the virtuous often suffer and the wicked often prosper in a world thought
to be ruled by a supernatural justice.41
The collectivity notwithstanding, the Yongzheng emperor had no doubt but
that he himself was special:42
The Lord of Men receives from Heaven a mandate of especial affection. . . .
The affective contact that he makes is especially swift. . . . For example, on
the sixteenth of the third month of this year [1725] We perused a memorial
from Yi Duli, the governor of the province of Shandong, informing Us that
there had been little rain during the three months of spring. . . . We reverently informed the Spirits Bright, then devoutly prayed with a puriﬁed
heart. We subsequently received a memorial from Yi Duli reporting that on
the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth they had received a sufﬁciency of
moisture from rain.
Q.E.D. He then quoted another case of his effective intervention, and told
the provincial ofﬁcials to be sure to memorialize him about local ﬂoods

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

423

and droughts. Otherwise, he said, “We may have no means of using selfexamination and abstinence to bring back the heart of Heaven, so allowing
these droughts and ﬂoods to become disasters.” He then modestly added that
“This decree of Ours is in no respect Our styling Ourselves skilled at awakening the understanding [of Heaven], or a wish to vaunt Ourselves before the
masses.” He was, he insisted, trying to make the point that “between Heaven
and humankind, affect and response working in unfailing fashion, and the
inhalation and exhalation [of matter–energy–vitality in the form of aethers],
form a channel of communication.”43
The doctrine that the weather and portents constituted a celestial–terrestrial
system of communications led to difﬁculties once a systematic attempt was
made to relate them to human behavior actually observed. The category of
‘accident’, elsewhere denied, had to be invoked in order to sidestep the contradictions. Early in 1730 the Yongzheng emperor was told by the Board of
Astronomy that on the ﬁrst day of the sixth month there would be an eclipse
of the sun lasting 9 minutes and 22 seconds. He reacted by saying that he was
“deeply fearful,” that the “feelings of the people” were perhaps still discontented, and that this was probably a warning from Heaven.44 After the event
had happened he issued the following decree:45
Sui Hede, Superintendent of the Imperial Manufactories at Nanjing has
stated in a memorial: “At the time of the solar eclipse . . . , the weather in the
Jiangning region was at ﬁrst overcast and rainy. By the afternoon the
appearance of Heaven had become clear and bright. Everything was visible.
There was no blemish on the light of the sun. Everyone in the area took this to
be an auspicious omen. I have especially sent in this memorial as congratulations.” We especially censured Sui Hede at this time in a rescript, saying:
“This is in no way a matter for one in your position to memorialize
about. . . . ” The governor of Shanxi, Jueluoshilin, has also memorialized:
“In Taiyuan and other places there were dense clouds and heavy rain. The
solar eclipse was invisible.” We have likewise sent down a decree issuing a
sharp rebuke. . . .
It may happen that those whom Heaven assists in auspicious fashion
become proud, boastful, reckless, or indolent, whereupon their previous
moral self-cultivation turns good fortune into disaster. . . . The solar eclipse
. . . of 1730 was a sign from Heaven, to warn us as to what was right, to feel
forever respectful fear. . . . How can it be right, because it was accidentally
not seen clearly, to engage in exaggerated talk in order to praise Us? That the
Shanxi region accidentally met with overcast and rainy weather cannot be
generalized over the whole empire. As to Sui Hede’s statement that in

424

Perceptions

Jiangnan there was no blemish on the light of the sun, We may infer the
reason. This occurred because, when the sun shone out after midday, it had
already gradually regained its circular shape. The portion missing was only
twenty or thirty per cent. It was for this reason that the portent of its incompleteness was not apparent.
In years gone by when We experienced a solar eclipse of forty or ﬁfty per
cent, the light was so bright that it was hard to look up at it. Our Late Father
[the Emperor Kangxi] led Us and Our brothers to the Qianqing palace,
where we used a telescope, with doubled paper on all sides to block out the
sun’s light. After this we were able to look out and examine the missing
portion. This We experienced in person. If the eclipsed portion had not
reached the proportion [forecast], then [this would have been because] the
Bureau of Astronomy had made a mistake in its calculations. How is it
possible on this account to disregard the warning from Heaven? . . .
In 1719 there was a solar eclipse on the ﬁrst of the ﬁrst month. . . . On this
day it was overcast and cloudy, with a light amount of snow. The eclipse
never clearly appeared. Our Late Father said in a decree to the ofﬁcials of the
Court: “Although the Capital has not seen it, in cloud-free places in the
other provinces there will certainly be some who have witnessed it. . . . ” We
now see that there are some ofﬁcials in the provinces away from the Capital
who, on account of this year’s solar eclipse not being visible there, have
become overjoyed and written memorials of congratulation. This is a gross
violation of proper pattern-principle.
The introduction of a modest proto-scientiﬁc component into the system
opened up contradictions that the Emperor could only wish away by the force
of authority. His successors understandably kept off such issues.
If the weather and other celestial and terrestrial phenomena were a response
by Heaven to the moral behavior of local ofﬁcials or local populations, it
followed that there should be variations detectable at a local level. Thus in 1732
the Yongzheng emperor commented that ﬂoods, droughts, and famines in a
particular locality could have many reasons: bad government at the center,
errors by local ofﬁcials, “vexatious commands by the authorities,” or “degenerate customs among the local population.” He went on:46
We have to take into consideration that the population of the empire is
numerous, and that some are good but others perverse. There may even be
some so stupid and ignorant that they feel grief and resentment at famine and
hardship. Now there is nothing worse than people turning their backs on
Heaven and pattern-principle by having a false heart–mind in normal

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

425

times, and perverse habits, and then—when Heaven sends them signs as a
warning—forgetting why Heaven Above bestows such chastisement, and
regarding themselves as guiltless recipients of a reprimand.
Even if We reform Ourselves and offer prayers, We will not always be able,
though acting on their behalves, to avert calamity from them or to render
their punishment lenient. This is something that is quite evident whenever
We see, in departments and counties that are not far distant from each other,
that the quantities of moisture provided by the rainfall are different, and that
some have good harvests and others dearth.
He reiterated this in 1733: “When Heaven Above sends down disasters, It often
demarcates localities and distinguishes boundaries, sometimes of wide extent
and sometimes narrow. . . . There are cases when an entire province has a
harvest, but a single prefecture, or a single county, or even a single rural district
or a single canton is alone afﬂicted by disaster. How could Heaven Above be
generous or stingy as between them? . . . There has always to be a reason for the
calling down [of a disaster].”47
Yongzheng was explicit about the responsibilities of local ofﬁcials: “If governors-general and governors are actually able loyally to embody the
dynasty–state, and love the people with a sincere heart, they will always be able
to summon the response of Heavenly harmony which will bestow auspicious
omens on the territories under their command.”48 Likewise he declared with
ferocious speciﬁcity: “With provincial governors like you, We are aware of the
pattern-principle that localities you rule will never have good harvests. Heaven
has sent down icy hailstones only on the areas under Mang Guli, Chen Shixia,
and Wei Tingzhen, which is most uncanny and fearful.”49 As he saw it, “the level
of the harvest will correspond to the level of the governor-general and the
governor,” and mentioned that when Mang Guli ﬁrst went to Hu'nan there
were ﬂoods, and, when he was transferred to Jiangxi, drought. When Bulantai
ruled over Gansu there were repeated reports of icy hailstones. “Such have
been the responses,” he said. “Remarkable!”50
A once-good ofﬁcial could also fade with age:51
Consider Tian Wenjing: when he was governor of He'nan, the strength of
his heart–mind was amply sufﬁcient, . . . and no one in the empire could
match him. When later he was ordered at the same time to be governorgeneral of Shandong in addition to these other duties, the effects of age and
illness had caused his spiritual power to decline . . . and errors and disasters
subsequently appeared with great frequency in both provinces. Was not
this a relatively clear proof [of the link between a state of mind and
actual events]?

426

Perceptions

Yongzheng was developing moral meteorology into a weapon for psychologically terrorizing both local populations and ofﬁcials.
The case of Xuanhua prefecture shows how the population at large could be
condemned for having an adverse effect on the weather through its bad
behavior. In 1729, Yongzheng issued this decree to the Grand Secretariat:52
We have already determined that the differences between the various localities in seasonality, and in rainfall and sunshine, are due either to defects in
the government at Court, or to local ofﬁcials failing in their duties, or else to
the customs of the people being corrupt, and their heart–minds false and
ungenerous. . . .
There were abundant harvests everywhere last year throughout the
province of Zhili. Only three administrative subdivisions, Xuanhua, Huailai,
and Baoan, missed being fertilized by the rains. We thereupon entertained
suspicions toward the ofﬁcials and commoners of these localities, fearing there
might be causes for them to have called this down upon themselves. In the fall,
Wang Tang, intendant of Koubei circuit, came to the Capital and We . . .
have now received a memorial from him:
During the summer and fall last year there was a drought in Xuanhua,
Huailai, and Baoan. In spring this year every other place received auspicious snow, but there was uniquely little of it in these localities. I left my
area on ofﬁcial business during the second month, and observed that
between the Jiming relay station and Xin Baoan there runs the old
Huimin Channel which irrigates several hundred qing of farmland. The
bannermen and civilian–commoners have been engaged in a lawsuit over
it for more than thirty years without it being settled. I examined in detail
the route taken by the channel, and ﬁrst of all made clear the rights and
wrongs of the matter. I then repeatedly proclaimed the imperial decree
that was received last year, and urged the parties to repent. In an instant
the bannermen and the commoner–civilians lauded the imperial
compassion, coming to their senses at once. They shared out the channel
and used it for irrigation jointly, putting an end forever to the grounds for
their dispute.
On the ﬁrst and second days of the third month there were actually
successive falls of auspicious snow, covering the land to the depth of more
than a foot on the level. . . .
If in some particular district the people are suspicious of one another, and
quarrel and start lawsuits, the disrupted matter–energy–vitality in people’s
breasts will cut through the matter–energy–vitality of Heaven and Earth. It
will also become blocked up in this particular place, unable to ﬂow freely or

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

427

be at ease, so how can there not be cases when rainfall and sunshine do not
come at the proper time?
Having proved his case, the emperor then insisted, as usual, that he was not
trying to push the blame onto the ofﬁcials and the common people, since
“rulers and people, superiors and inferiors, are basically a single entity.”
Later in the same year, when the situation had deteriorated again, he was not
so magnanimous.53 He called for strenuous local self-rectiﬁcation by both the
local ofﬁcials and populace. But the prefecture was still not off the hook of
imperial displeasure. Early in the fall of 1734 Yongzheng recapitulated the past
weather history of the place and then continued: “In the winter months [of
1723] everywhere else had auspicious snow, but this area had uniquely little,
which was certainly caused by either the local civilian and military ofﬁcials
being unable to cooperate with each other, or by ignorant commoners
disrupting the harmony of the [local] matter–energy–vitality.”54 He noted that
there had now been a drought in Xuanhua followed by damage to the crops
from icy hailstones, “the biggest of which were the size of a ﬁst or a chicken’s
egg.” This was followed by more moral-meteorological analysis:55
We are of the opinion that although icy hail commonly occurs in the
northern regions, yet the disasters suffered by the villages of Xuanhua seem
uniquely severe, and rarely seen in recent times. It is evident that Heaven
Above has been sending signs again and again to warn Xuanhua. If by any
chance the local ofﬁcials or common peoples regard these as accidents due
to natural causation then they are inferior people who do not know how to
tremble in fear and reﬂect on their transgressions.
He ordered copies of his decree to be issued far and wide, so that the ofﬁcials
and people of Xuanhua would “every one of them reﬂect on their misdoings”
so as to enjoy seasonable weather and good harvests in the future.
The Qianlong emperor who succeeded Yongzheng may have had reservations about the attitudes among ofﬁcials induced by these obsessions of his
predecessor. In 1735, the year of his accession, he issued56 a decree noting that
even certain of the sage–emperors of antiquity had not been able to avoid
droughts and ﬂoods, and continued:57
Governors-general and governors have the weighty charge of provincial
government laid upon them, and report on the percentile levels of the harvest.
This is related to the fate of the people of the region concerned. It must be
accurate and without falsiﬁcation, so that one may discuss tax remissions
and relief measures. . . . We . . . have observed that in the reports of the
harvest percentiles from the various provinces it sometimes happens that

428

Perceptions

these are determined only on the basis of an abundant harvest in a single
place, or that in areas with an excess of rainfall the harvest in high-lying
places has been taken as the standard, while in years of drought the standard
is what has been reaped in low-lying areas. . . . The sole purpose is to paint a
deceptively pretty picture, so as to attract the reputation of summoning
forth harmonious matter–energy–vitality. . . .
You governors-general and governors, . . . how can you, because the
harvest has been abundant, greedily treat the achievements of Heaven as
your own? If a bumper crop is to be adduced as your own achievement,
then, necessarily, We fear, a dearth must be accounted your fault. To fabricate the report of a good harvest is to lack pity for the people’s difﬁculties.
Meteorological religion intensiﬁed statistical malpractice.58
Qianlong maintained the assumption of local responsibility.59 He was even
willing to blame his own lack of virtue when all of the metropolitan province
received spring rain, except for the area immediately around the capital.60 In
1740, when the governor of Shanxi reported at mid-year that all of his province
had received satisfactory rain except for the two prefectures where the provincial capital was located, he received the rebuke that “since only the areas in
which your prefectural capital lies have not been able to be sufﬁciently moistened, it is abundantly clear that this was caused by [your] slack government.”
Nonetheless it seems that, as his reign progressed, this question of localized
responsibility only intermittently interested Qianlong.
The topic regained a momentary importance in 1758 with a prolonged
drought in Gansu. The governor and other ofﬁcials were told to go on
offering their prayers, and also to clear off the backlog of outstanding legal
cases. They were to exercise discretion in this regard, however, for “if in all
cases criminals are forgiven, this is, on the contrary, not the way to summon
down omens of good fortune, and to look up for fertilizing rain.” Additionally, “they are to pay attention to searching out every manner of person who is
well-versed in praying for rain, and ﬁnd means to set them praying.”61 This
partial substitution of virtuous behavior by religious technology reappeared
in 1784 with the case of Weihui, a prefecture in He'nan that remained rainless
after the rest of the province had been rained on during the eighth month.
The emperor sent ofﬁcials to clarify by investigation why this place had
repeatedly suffered from droughts. He told them to procure an “established
Muslim prayermaker for rain,” and have him ride via the relay service to
He'nan province where he was to “reverently offer prayers in the hope that
this will swiftly spread about a sweet fertilization.”62 These two cases contrast
with earlier moralism, and were part of a trend in the Qianlong reign toward
a morally empty ritualism.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

429

Qianlong’s successor Jiaqing only once became explicitly concerned with
the question of localization. This was in 1817, near the end of his reign. Late in
the summer of that year he decreed to the Grand Council:63
Fertilization from rain has been deﬁcient this year throughout Zhili, but the
areas under the jurisdiction of Shuntian [around the Capital] have been the
most severely affected. . . . We have now especially composed Some Words on
Our Hope for Rain and Reﬂections upon Our Transgressions to Recount Our
Anxious Concern. Let it be issued to [Governor-general] Fang Shouchou,
Provincial Treasurer Yao Zutong, Provincial Judge Changbi, and the various
intendants and prefects for them to read. Each of them ought to examine
himself with his hand on his heart.
Heretofore the pattern-principle of [human] affect and [Heavenly]
response has been unfailing time and again. If the said provincial ofﬁcials
had managed affairs diligently and in a completely public-spirited manner,
all cooperating with each other, there would not have been a case such as
this in which every neighboring province has a rich harvest, and only in this
province is there drought as a portent of warning.64 The wheat harvest has
already proved deﬁcient. If the great ﬁelds are not sown broadcast in good
time, there will be no supply of food for the humble folk.
He ordered them to take practical measures, such as destroying locust larvae,
and observed that “Whenever a locality suffers from the disaster of dearth,
worthless people harbor thoughts of taking advantage of this occasion to fan
confusion,” a prospect that required preventive measures. He concluded that it
was to be hoped that diligent fulﬁlment of duty by everyone might “regain the
[kindly] intentions of Heaven,” but that if they continued to neglect the
people’s livelihood and disregard his instructions, “good conscience would be
destroyed” and Heaven’s help prove unattainable.
By the beginning of the winter he had found a different explanation that
exonerated the provincial ofﬁcials:65
The quality of the harvest in the metropolitan area and the other provinces
is of the acutest relevance to the people’s livelihood. That across the width
of the four seas [that is, in China] there can be immense disparities between
harvests, and that rainfall and sunshine are not alike, is because the patternprinciple of affect and response between human activities and the weather
from Heaven is assuredly one that is manifestly unfailing. Whenever one
sees provincial ofﬁcials putting government in good order, and the people’s
customs being of a good and pure nature, again and again the sunshine and
the rain are seasonally appropriate, and the harvests full. But if it so happens
that the ofﬁcials are greedy and corrupt, and the temper of the people

430

Perceptions

abrasive, then perverse matter–energy–vitality will form itself into portents,
which is enough to cause disasters. If one reﬂects and examines, this can be
substantiated in case after case.
In the summer of this year the area near the Capital suffered from
drought. After repeated prayers had been offered, there were still no copious
rains. We gave this matter anxious thought from dawn till dusk, but were
unable to determine the reason. Subsequently, in the seventh and eight
months, the serious treason of Haikang and Qingyao came to light, while
Xiao Zhen’s greedy and ﬁlthy pursuit of his own personal interests, which
had given him an evil reputation, was destroyed by being discovered. All of
these have been judged and punished. In the ninth month there were repeated
downpours of sweet enrichment. The entire area around the Capital has had
excellent moistening.
The explanation for this is that Haikang and Qingyao were using the
descendants of the Imperial House to liaise with rebels, and that Xiao Zhen
was using his position as an ofﬁcial in charge of morals to throw the legal
framework into disorder. Both of these were cases of the major destruction
of the constant pattern [of good government]. It may perhaps have been on
this account that the Azure Above sent warnings. Now that subversion has
been extirpated and harmonious sweetness been forthwith summoned
down, one has a deep insight into the pattern-principle of affect and
response between humankind and Heaven. Should we not all be warned
and affrighted?!
Weather that had earlier seemed a rebuke to the established order could be
dexterously spin-doctored to serve as a proof of its legitimacy.
The localized character of moral-meteorological effects vanishes as a major
theme after this time, though there were brief reappearances.
It may be asked to what extent the emperors of the middle Qing period
believed in the meteorological religion described here. In the case of the
Yongzheng emperor at least66 extended afﬁrmations of his convictions are to be
found scattered through the Sacred Instructions in various contexts. They are
not conﬁned to the chapters on showing respect for Heaven. Thus they occur
in decrees on ‘sage-like virtue’, ‘loving the people’, ‘giving instruction to
ofﬁcials’, ‘extending the avenues of communication [to the emperor]’, ‘being
cautious about punishments’, ‘emphasizing farming and sericulture’, ‘consolidating customs’, ‘tax exemptions and relief ’, and so on. Certain comments hint
at the depth of the emperor’s concern with the weather. “In the middle of the
night,” he says, “We repeatedly get up to look out at the appearance of the
clouds, so as to divine ﬁne weather or rainfall.”67 In the ﬁrst year of his reign

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

431

he ordered several hundred people awaiting trial to be released, and observed
afterwards that “in not more than three or four days there were heavy falls of
welcome rain,” adding that “no one says that this was a contingent conjuncture
of events, or that it happened as the result of accident.”68
Underlying this was his doctrine of universal intersensitivity:69
The emptiness that is before our faces is indeed August Heaven. That upon
which we walk, and whose soil we shovel, is indeed the Great Earth. Just as
for a human being’s body of seven [Chinese] feet, if one pulls on a single
tiny hair, then the whole frame will feel pain and irritation, how can a
person placed between Heaven and Earth give rise to a single thought, or
effect a single action, without Heaven and Earth being in mutual contact
with him or her, just as breath passes in and out of us?
He wanted local ofﬁcials to engage every year in ritual plowing, as he did, “so
they know how hard husbandry is, and understand the bitter lot of farmers.”70
When the minor miracle occurred of rice regrowing shoots after being cut, that
was because local ofﬁcials and people had touched the sensibilities of Heaven.71
Everything was sensitive to everything else. Yet, often enough, obvious connections were not made. The customs of Fujian were notoriously violent,72 yet no
mention was made of this in 1726 when the province had excessive rains and
rice prices soared.73
Virtue was, on exceptional occasions, rewarded. In 1729, the emperor
decreed:74
We have also received a memorial from the governor-general, governor,
provincial treasurer, and provincial judge of Guangdong, in which they state
that the rains this year have been well distributed, that the various kinds of
grain are coming smoothly to maturity, and that they calculate that the price
of rice throughout the province has come down from eight qian [tenths of
an ounce of silver] to ﬁve or six qian per picul, which is something that
happens rarely in the province. We were delighted at this news. This has
come about because the people of the province concerned have
heart–minds that are pure, good, loyal, and stripped of any levity. This has
caused Heaven Above to send down Its help, bestowing rich crops. For the
year 1730 Shandong [discussed earlier in the decree] and Guangdong are to
be excused 400,000 ounces of silver of land and capitation tax to reward the
goodness of the local ofﬁcials and people.
Imperial brownie-points. This section of the decree is also interesting in being
one of the few in which moral meteorology was applied to south China with
its less variable climate, typhoons apart.

432

Perceptions

The brownie-point approach could bring its difﬁculties. In 1729 the
emperor noted how the able rule of Tian Wenjing in He'nan province had for
a number of years been attended by excellent harvests. Now, per contra, there
had been a bad one. Concerned not to cast doubt on the qualities of one of his
most capable ofﬁcials, the best the emperor could do was to comment, “Now,
Our excusing the people the payment of the principal tax on account of the
dearth is to be taken in the sense of providing relief for the poor and showing
of pity for those in difﬁculties.” He felt obliged to sidestep as best he could the
evident ideological trap.
The majority of the decrees in the Sacred Instructions are in fact practical.
Thus seawalls should be rebuilt in stone so as to prevent any further worries.75
So what determined why, on any particular occasion, the emperor responded
in the language of meteorological religion or in the language of straightforward administrative response?
The same event could evoke both responses on different occasions. On 5 and
6 September 1724 a typhoon smashed the seawalls in a number of places along
the coast of southern Jiangsu and northern Zhejiang. On 1 October76 the
emperor issued the decree translated earlier, suggesting that the sufferers might
have been in some measure responsible for their own misfortune, because of
their moral defects. Ten days later77 he noted that he had already ordered relief
in a secret decree, as the matter was urgent.78 A further twenty-seven days later,
on 6 November,79 he promulgated an unideological decree on this event,
followed by another the day after. The sequence seems surprising, but the
contents of the ﬁrst of these last two documents conﬁrm that there had indeed
been earlier decrees of a practical nature:80
The ﬁelds and cottages of the common people have been inundated. Our
thoughts are with them in the keenest compassion. We have already issued
decrees to the local ofﬁcials of Jiangsu and Zhejiang to undertake relief measures as a matter of urgency, and to comfort them, so that those smitten by
disaster do not become displaced persons. If the breached seawalls are not
quickly repaired, it is to be feared that the salt water will enter the inland
waterways, which will make difﬁculties for farming. You governors-general
and governors ought to inspect the damage in each place, estimate the cost
of the labor and material for the dikes, mobilize the principal tax funds,81
and quickly set the work in motion so that the coastal people who have lost
their lands can survive these difﬁculties with food supplied by the daily
wages from this task.
The decree issued the following day provided for the importation of rice
from other provinces at ofﬁcial expense.82 It is clear from the ﬁrst of these two
documents that the compendium does not always have the complete set

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

433

of ofﬁcial responses available, since the decrees to local ofﬁcials referred
to are not included in the Sacred Instructions. The seemingly odd sequence—
moralizing ﬁrst, help afterwards—was thus not necessarily what actually
happened. But the basic point is that both responses could exist in parallel,
and on occasion in different documents, with respect to one and the same
event.
Moral-meteorological language was most commonly resorted to on two
sorts of occasion, of rather different natures. The ﬁrst was a shortage of rain,
since drought seems to have been felt to be Heaven’s distinctive way of
showing Its displeasure, and rainfall the distinctive mark of Its response to
sincerity. The second was when there was no easy direct way of sanctioning
undesirable attitudes and behavior, especially if this behavior was diffuse and
collective, hence elusive.
Examples of the ﬁrst type are too numerous to be worth listing, but a somewhat curious instance may be found combined with the second type in a
decree of 22 July 1730, where the unhappy consequences of badly targeted
imperial praying and an immodest collective psychological attitude are offered
as complementary possibilities for the causes of ﬂooding:83
We have heard that in Jiangsu and Zhejiang the rains have been somewhat
heavy, and that the grain in the ﬁelds has been inundated to a disastrous
degree. We have bent Our thoughts to deducing the cause for this, and it has
occurred to Us that as spring moved into summer this year the fertilization
by rain in the Capital did not take place in the proper season. We offered
prayers for the metropolitan area, and Our anxious solicitude reached out
to the areas of Jiangsu and Zhejiang. Once the Capital had received rain Our
heart–mind concentrated on requests on behalf of Jiangsu and Zhejiang,
causing the situation where the south has had a large quantity of precipitation.
We were not informed of this, but were still apprehensive that the rain there
was but little. . . . Now, when you ofﬁcials are aware of a certain degree of
ﬂooding or drought you must immediately submit a memorial to Us about
it, precisely for this reason. The south had already had extensive rains at a
time when Our heart–mind was still continuing to pray for rain there.
Might it have been that it was this attitude of mind of Ours that caused
Heaven Above to bestow an excessive quantity of rain, and Zhejiang province
to have places that were ﬂooded?
The power of imperial prayer was not to be underestimated. He then however
switched to a second hypothesis, that excessive rain was well known as a
rebuke from Heaven for arrogance, and Zhejiang had been doing perhaps too
well in the imperial examinations lately. Perhaps the people there were getting
above themselves? He did not adjudicate between these possibilities.

434

Perceptions

The second especial use of moral meteorology was to put corrective pressure on a psychological attitude that the emperor felt to be undesirable. An
example may be found in a decree of 1732. Yongzheng starts by observing that
“The ancients used to say that harmonious matter–energy–vitality caused
good fortune whereas perverse matter–energy–vitality caused untoward
events. This is the ultimate pattern-principle of mutual inﬂuences between
Heaven and humankind.” He then comes to the speciﬁc problem, quite transparently exploiting the meteorological leverage once the actual problem had in
fact passed:84
In summer last year and in spring this year there was drought at the Capital.
Slight earthquakes still continued. . . . We have concentrated Our thoughts
on examining the bannermen. In one or two matters there seems to be
matter–energy–vitality that has been repressed and is not comfortable, so in
upward fashion causing Heaven to be angry. We cannot be lenient with
Ourselves, and each of the many concerned ought likewise to reﬂect
upon himself.
When armed force was used against the Zunghars,85 generals and soldiers
from the Eight Banners were sent on distant duty to an area outside the
empire. Their fathers and mothers, wives and children, either looked at each
other in grief within their families or else thought that the Court had no
compassion for its servicemen. Do they not realize that, as regards this
unavoidable undertaking, the Zunghar bandit-barbarians are cunning and
cruel, . . . that they molest the Mongols who have become our feudatories,
and cast eyes on our northwestern frontiers? . . . In no way are We ﬁghting
[unreasonably] to the bitter end or prolonging hostilities in the desire
to expand Our territory, exhausting Our soldiers in the Gobi and the
wastelands. . . .
The men of Our eight Manchu banners have constantly in the past had
heart–minds that were loyal and public-spirited, and a heroic and daring
matter–energy–vitality. When your grandfathers and fathers followed the
imperial founder in through the frontier passes, they all considered the
sacriﬁce of their lives to be glorious, and death of old age beneath the
window to be shameful. You now enjoy peace and have long become habituated to banquets and taking your ease, and merely on account of a few
years of campaigning have given vent to grief and resentment. . . . Even
[your] fathers and mothers, wives and children, ought to be conscious of
great public obligation, suppress personal and selﬁsh feelings, setting their
minds on what is far-reaching and of major importance. Then will singleminded sincerity in loyalty to the ruler and repayment of favors to the

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

435

dynasty–state certainly receive the regard of Heaven Above, and Its silent
granting of good fortune and assistance.
It should be recalled that in 1731, the previous year, the imperial forces under
Fudan had been severely defeated by the Zunghars.86 It is not surprising that
banner morale was low. The second part of the decree continues in the same
vein to inveigh against the ﬁnancial malpractices and extortions of the
bannermen’s leaders. It is thus likely that the supernatural was felt to be a
useful weapon in combatting deeply rooted bad attitudes as well as abuses that
may have related to the power-struggle between the Yongzheng emperor and
three of the banner leaders.87
In formulating a provisional assessment we have to balance an evident opportunism in the use of moral meteorology on the part of the emperor with the
acknowledgment that it would not have been a useful weapon in his armory of
political tactics had it not been able to appeal to a stratum of real belief both in
the elite and in the populace. It is also hard to imagine that, with at least with a
part of his mind, Yongzheng did not also give some credence to it. His ofﬁcials
were aware of his fascination with auspicious portents, and served him up a
steady diet of reports of multiheaded stalks of corn,88 lucky mushrooms,89 sightings of ‘phoenixes’—one of them allegedly seen by a thousand people,90 and
‘unicorns’, the last one of which came complete with its own portrait.91
He was also aware that they were aware, and so he remained generally skeptical of these reports. A Shandong ‘unicorn’ was rejected because the northern
weather had been too bad for it to be credible, and because he had had to use
the army in the northwest.92 An ‘auspicious’ piece of silk woven directly by the
silkworms themselves—or so it was said, the emperor remaining doubtful—
was dismissed with the remark that the occasional favorable omen like this was
not enough to protect people from hunger.93 The only omen that mattered for
him, he declared of the unicorn with the portrait, was the well-being of the
people, caused by the quality of the polity attracting the harmonious accord of
Heaven. One suspects he enjoyed the ideological luxury both of having these
omens and then—with ostentatious virtue—rejecting most of them.
The fascination is palpable in his reaction to a report in 1727 that the Yellow
River had ﬂowed clear. This was an omen he accepted, though stressing both
that it owed much to the help of his late imperial father, and that it must have
been collectively merited.94 A stele was set up with an inscription on it to
commemorate the event, every detail being listed:95
[Various ofﬁcials] have memorialized that, following the breaking up of the
ice, the Yellow River ran clear from Fugu county in Shaanxi province, passing

436

Perceptions

through Shanxi, He'nan, and Shandong provinces to Taoyuan in Jiangnan,
being limpidly translucent. It was ﬁrst observed in Shaanxi and Shanxi on 30
December 1726 (yichou),96 and continued until 3 February, 1727 (gengzi).97 All
in all it lasted thirty-six days. In He'nan and Shandong it ﬁrst appeared on 31
December 1726 and lasted until 31 January in the following year, a total of
thirty-one days [sic]. In Danxian in Shandong it was likewise clear from
1 January to 8 January,98 and on 9 January it was so lucid that one could see the
bottom. On the twelfth day of this same month, however, it gradually returned
to its old [muddy] condition. This was fourteen days [sic] in all. In Jiangnan it
began on 7 January99 and lasted until 14 January, seven days in all. The general
conclusion is that the clarity came from above [i.e., upstream] and moved
down, and that the return to its old former condition came from below [i.e.,
downstream] and moved upwards. This was the pattern in time and space.
The emperor’s own comment on this ﬂattering phenomenon (especially
because the movement of the clear area ‘from above’ suggested his own
primacy in the matter) was, after ordering the promotion of the ofﬁcials
concerned by one rank, as follows:
Now, once Heaven has produced rainwater, the matter–energy–vitality of
Heaven and Earth ﬂows through it. The Yellow River is moreover designated
the ancestor of the four great rivers, and corresponds to the Milky Way
above. For its clear and peaceful ﬂow to constitute an auspicious portent, a
cooperative reaction to the harmony of Heaven must come from somewhere. The Scripture of Songs says: “King Wen ascends and descends [in
Heaven], assisting at the left and the right hand of God.”100 What this says is
that King Wen and Heaven shared the same virtue, and that his sons and
grandsons received good fortune from him. Our Late Imperial Father has
accompanied the magical efﬁcacy of Heaven in being manifest on high. His
affectionate concern and guidance are deep and substantial. We have received
this auspicious omen with awe.
Decoded, the message is simple: the Yongzheng emperor, still haunted by the
accusation that he was a usurper, was seizing on this unusual behavior by
the Yellow River to prove his legitimacy by maintaining that his late father, the
Kangxi emperor, was showing his approval from the other world. We are back
with opportunism, but—as I have said already—Yongzheng must have
believed that many people would be persuaded by this tortuous nonsense.
Without an audience that can be convinced, there is no sense in making such
pronouncements. Indeed there is a risk of mockery.
His real thoughts on the matter remain a mystery.101

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

437

The Bell of Poesy
Poems are dangerous sources for the historian. They are written—for the most
part—to arouse the emotions rather than to convey information. The only
immediate political, legal, or organizational purpose they serve, when they
serve it, is that of persuasion. In other words, they can be propaganda. They
are also imaginative creations, even when written in explicit response to
particular real events, as many Chinese poems of the late-imperial period
were. But in the present context these arguments can be turned round. If many
of the poems in The Bell of Poesy were written to persuade, the attitude they
embodied toward nature must have been felt by the writer to be persuasive to
his readers. That they were chosen by Zhang Yingchang for his anthology also
argues in favor of their being in some measure representative. What is
signiﬁcant is that they show remarkably diverse attitudes toward nature and
the environment.
More than a few Chinese were allured by the romance of large-scale development. An example is given by some lines written by Zhang Yongquan after he
had seen ﬂooding from the Yellow River, then on a southern course, impair the
functioning of the Grand Canal.102 He was aware—as were all Chinese
concerned with water control—of the way in which trouble was caused by the
Yellow River blocking the natural exit of the Huai River (discussed in chapter
6), and the need for constant hydraulic work to enable the imperial graintransport to cross the Yellow River safely near this point:
This year we build the dike secure,
Yet next year it has fallen breached.
This bank has just been made complete,
When that bank’s falling down in ruins.
Each year a million cash disbursed,
Like ﬁlling the sea — to little use.
He then asserted that the reason the Yellow River did not ﬂow peacefully was
because the ditches and channels, used for irrigation and draining, were “silted
up.” He followed this wrongheaded hydrology with a paean of praise to
regional self-sufﬁciency in ancient times. The reference to the Qin altering the
‘boundary strips’ comes from a tradition that this was part of the new empire’s
destruction of the so-called ‘well-ﬁeld system’ of land tenure that allegedly
reigned in antiquity.
When, long ago, they founded states,
Their lands produced the food they ate.

438

Perceptions

One never heard of Yan and Zhao
Relying on taxes from the South!
When Qin redrew the boundary strips,103
The once rich land fell derelict.
Earth’s storehouse yielded no more crops.
Hard to maintain were millet stocks,
And scarce was grain in the Northwest
Because hydraulics were neglected,
The Southeast awash with rushing waters,
A menace caused by the selfsame fault.
Putting bad hydrology and dubious history together, Zhang was inspired by an
engineer’s vision of a fully irrigated, bureaucratically controlled, north China
plain, producing enough food to make the imperial grain-transport system
unnecessary, and presenting an obstacle to mounted brigands with its dense
network of water channels:
Forth comes the Yellow River, out from its Dragon Gates,
And endless, endless, are the miles it ﬂows with furious waves!
Now — to train its traveling surges not to overspill their course,
The current of the waters must be weakened near their source.
Once split apart in branch streams along the upper reaches,
The distributaries that lie downstream will then spread out in peace.
...
In the lands of the north, and the central plains,
Ofﬁcials will govern the adits and the drains.
For the pattern of conduits they’ll lay down the rules,
So the land’s watered as water runs through!
...
We’ll use water’s own requirements to ﬁx the varying depths,
And follow the topography for the straight parts and the bends.
And when ten years have run their course, we shall proclaim the fruits:
How all along the River there are multiple branch loops,104
Such that the terrain there has been turned to fertile acres,
And every last locality has abundant ears of grain.
The supplies of tax rice sent to Court, and cargoes, too, of millet,
Will have cut the costs of shipping grain down close to nonexistent.
So dense a channel network will make riding horses difﬁcult,
And malfeasance won’t be simple for brigands or for miscreants.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

439

Here, before the modern age, is the passion for misconceived grandiose
projects that today continues to inspire constructions such as the Three
Gorges Dam.
Counterbalancing this was an awareness of the disastrous results of some of
the development that had actually been put into effect. Zhou Xipu, who was
for a time the magistrate of a county in Gansu (on the border between the
Northwest and the Far West) during the eighteenth century, gave a description
of the salinization of farmlands opened in an inappropriately arid region. He
begins with a prose preface:105
I was deputed to inspect a disaster caused by hail at Xiangshan, . . . and to
reach it I had to traverse a terrain of fractured rocks. I was unable here to
exchange my money for grain and fodder. On asking the reason for this I
learned that the people who live in these mountains eat peng grasses. They
showed me three kinds, namely ‘sandy peng’, ‘watery peng’, and ‘ﬂossy peng’.
The way in which they were eaten was to boil them ﬁrst in water, take them
out, strain them, and then put them into water again and cook them into a
broth. . . . When there was a surplus, they were dried in readiness against the
winter. . . . I ordered some to be boiled and served to me. Their taste was
rank, and so astringent that I could hardly get them down my throat; yet the
frontier people eat them from one year’s end to the next. . . . It is my view
that raining hailstones is a common disruption of Heaven, but that humans
eating grasses is a strangely desperate circumstance.
One kind resembles a feathery screen, and has a head that droops.
So it is known as the ‘sandy peng’. It grows on the edge of dunes.
Another kind is a sprout, and is found in swamp-like dips.
It bears the name of ‘watery peng’. It’s a type of artemisia.
There is besides a ‘ﬂossy peng’, with many-lobed, blue-green, leaves.
As summer commences it gently puts forth a ﬂeecy white appearance.
The young wives in their dark blue dress melted the last of the ice,
And, to give me something to choose from, boiled together all three kinds.
Bitter and rank is the soil’s vitality. Their taste was bitter and harsh. . . .
I asked the people, For how many years had they been eating these plants?
How was it they did not break the clods, in the ﬁelds, for the ﬁve main
crops?
“From the River at Ningxia — they said — our access is blocked off.
These lofty crags with knife-like edges are far beyond its course. . . .
It has so happened that humans here dwell mingled with mountain
goblins,

440

Perceptions

Dried up in heat, a-shiver in frosts. The Dark Force vitality’s lost,
With many-fold mists, close-pressing dews, and the Bright Force likewise
closed off. . . .
Springtime we know, but not the twigs upon the willows swelling.
To refresh the dryness of our lungs, we long for unsullied wells.
After the snowmelt, mud in the sands is all we have to drink,
Yet, in times gone by, our forebears here managed both plowing and
ridging.
Countless hoes chopped at the hills. — Then the hills’ arteries changed,
And, as the ﬁrst sprouts opened, so too did saline ﬂakes.
They tell tales as well of mosquito larvae, huge as caterpillars’ pupae.
The state-given hoes were tossed away, as triﬂes no longer useful.
We sons, and grandsons, eat peng grass now, in order to stay alive.
One meal a day, for people are many, but grasses in short supply.
In hunger, our guts turn round and round, like silk-reeling wheels acrying.
Not long ago we sought pasturage on the west hills’ lower slopes
To graze our sheep and cattle there, and good returns were hoped for:
Meat for consumption and oxen’s hides to serve as clothing cover,
And surplus resources for famine congee boiled up out of the husks.
Once the disastrous hailstones struck, in a moment this turned to nothing.
The bones of dead stock, in the pastures, are a glut of rotting ﬂesh,106
And the old crows and the loathsome kites fatten upon the wreckage. . . .
We have had to look to the peng grass again. Alas! It is all that is left.
Heaven we thank, and bow to It twice, beseeching Its compassion.
Yet all we should want for a regular crop would be Polygonatum.107 . . .
This piece was written, as was often the case, to appeal to the local ofﬁcials for
their pity and help. We have therefore to consider the possibility that the
tragedy was drawn too starkly. The justice and mercy of Heaven, or
Heaven–Nature, are also implicitly questioned—once again a not infrequent
feature of such poems, and a contrast to the pieties of imperial decrees and
most philosophers. While it describes only one small tessera in the vast mosaic
of pressures on the environment in late-imperial China, it is clear that the
author understood that what had happened was the consequence of what we
today see as inappropriate development.
Optimists, as always, maintained that further resources could be found, given
the effort. Here are some lines written on Dunhuang in the far Northwest by
Xu Naigu, who served as its magistrate some time around 1831:108

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

441

Dunhuang commandery, under the Han, once had its hour of glory.
And commoners who migrated there forgot their past exhaustion.
They selected metallic ores to offer, as tribute, to the Treasury;
The region was rich, but those it supported declined and lost their energy.
The mountains are void, and the veins of ore, today, are totally empty,
Like pelts that now are all that’s left of what once were living leopards.
Off to the west the farmland stretches, grown desiccated and waste.
What means are there of chasing after the farmers who have absconded?
The soils are covered over with sand, and heavily salinated,
Where the sprouts that sprout today will tomorrow have no tomorrow.
I wanted to excavate down deep, to the springs where the waters ﬂow.
The masses gathered in response, their spades upon their shoulders.
Nothing is wrong with these riches of Earth still being further sought for.
It may be that in the empty bag remain some last resources.
It is not clear from the poem how successful he was in reaching ground water.
The theme of endless resources was, though, something of a cliché. Thus Xie
Yuanhuai’s verses on the salt monopoly contain the lines:109
The treasuries of Heaven and Earth, now they are rich indeed.
How could it ever be that they were appropriated completely?
The opposite view was also powerfully expressed. Concern with the depletion of mineral resources, notably metal ores and coal, surfaces in many
poems. Some dramatic verses by Yao Chun on the dangers of coal mining,
including the deaths of miners from subsidence, and from drowning when
underground waters were released by mistake, note that “after long excavations, the bones of the mountains are empty.”110 A representative statement of
this theme of resource exhaustion may be found in some lines by Wang Taiyue
in a long and famous poem on the ofﬁcial Yunnan copper mines (in the
Southwest), probably written around the middle or late eighteenth century:111
They gather at dawn, by the mouth of the shaft,
Standing there naked, their garments stripped off,
Lamps strapped to their heads in carrying-baskets
To probe in the darkness the fathomless bottom.
Grazed by the stones’ teeth, by sharp-edged projections,
They grope down sheer cliffs, and across mossy patches.
The hot months torment them with harsh epidemics,
When poisonous vapors mix with hot gases.

442

Perceptions

In the chill of the winter, their bodies will tremble,
Hands blister with chilblains. Their feet will be chapped.
Down the mine, for this reason, they huddle together,
But hardly revive, their life’s force at a standstill. . . .
As the underground ways to the ores pierce new depths,
They fear, as they cut and they drill, to hit marble.
What took, in times past, a mere morning’s efforts
Now needs ten days of their work to be garnered.
The wood they must have is no longer available,
The forests shaved bald, like a convict’s head. Blighted.
Only now they regret — felling day after day
Has left them no way to provide for their ﬁrewood.
Problems therefore threaten them, in mining and in smelting,
And risks that soon they may provoke the bureaucrats’ ill temper.
Resource exhaustion led to increased danger. Wang went on:
Worse still, as the mountainsides’ bellies were hollowed,
The subsidence this caused demolished the rocks,
And smashed them to fragments, like scattering pebbles,
As, in one death, a few hundreds perished. . . .
Their spirits were heard, in the depths of night, wailing,
As their ghost-ﬁres were ﬂickering, chilled in the gale.
How worthless, alas! is a human’s existence,
Its price even less than a chicken’s or piglet’s.
Even multitudinous riches, spread about them on all sides,
Could still not give a guarantee that even one survived.
So fecund are the hills and seas, it seems to deserve no answer
To ask, Do they only ﬂourish when they’re guarded by disasters?
— The Dark Force and Bright Force contract, then dilate,
Like busy artiﬁcers, shaping and shaping.
Yet, if used up entirely, and restraint not observed,
Human effort’s enough to void Heaven and Earth.
Or as Wei Yuan prosaically observed, “When the population is full up and the
land is full up, these two causes are enough to engender catastrophe.”112 Zhu
Zhang, writing, either late in the seventeenth or early in the eighteenth
century, about a boatload of refugees from Hu'nan (in the Center), with their
dogs and fowls on board, moving into Sichuan (in the West), likewise bluntly

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

443

remarked that “the land of Sichuan is full, and the fertile spots are on the point
of all being occupied.”113
The most horriﬁc moments of the environmental crisis of late-traditional
China were summed up in gruesome fashion by Qiao Xu in one of his doggerel
poems on famine:114
We gather and gather the elms off the fells,
Till the elm bark is stripped away utterly,
Gather, gather the grass by the cemetery entrance,
Till the grass roots are not ﬁt for sucking.
To get two pints of grain costs a thousand cash, copper.
A hundred in cash buys us two pints of husks.
We sell clothes, and buy husks, to nourish our offspring,
Sell our ox to buy grain to feed father and mother.
But without an ox, how can we plow?
How keep ourselves warm without clothes?
— Don’t ask us how we will plow,
Nor how we’ll keep from the cold.
Though the season is neither the winter nor fall,
Our family can, all of us, still stay indoors.
One can’t bear to butcher a man still alive.
But there’s no need to cover the dead, even naked.
From my carrying-bag I extract a sharp knife,
And, from his carcass, carve me a steak.
With withered stalks warming the stoneware container,
He is boiled till half done, but likewise half raw.
He lacks blubber, is scrawny, his body is wasting,
Needing seasoning with herbs picked beside the hill torrent.
If those still alive can thereby be rescued,
The dead should be pleased when they are ingested.
These two they were once a mother and child,
But with one mouthful taken and just one cry uttered,
Before that cry’s echo had died into silence,
Their limbs all grew chilled, then shriveled up suddenly.
And when, moments later, their life-force was cut,
They also served to bloat the other folks’ guts.

444

Perceptions

Elm bark was a common famine food, and one poem on the theme of hungry
people stripping it says: “Once the elms are ﬁnished we shall come to die
together beneath the trees.”115 The tone of Qiao’s verses just quoted seems
savage to Western ears, but the Chinese view may often have been, as Qin Ying
put it in a poem on the victims of a ﬂood in Zhedong, that:116
For the dead it’s ﬁnished,
To live on is bitterer still.
Those who took up their brushes to record such events were only too aware
that, as Shen Shuben said,117 even as he excused Heaven for a disaster by
blaming it on “the numbers,” that is, on fate:
Writing this verse is no more than a dirge,
As, even though freezing, an insect still chirps.
In real life, as opposed to philosophy, Heaven–Nature was not so easily loved.
The question of Heaven–Nature’s justice was often raised, but then, almost
equally often, shied away from to avoid the all-too-apparent negative answer.
The commonest view of human relationships with nature was, however, more
conﬁdent and assertive. By preparation, determination, and skill, human
beings could handle most of the problems with which nature confronted
them. Thus, in a poem on drought, Liu Shufang declared:118
Disharmony, and disasters, do not need to cause us hurt,
Since human efforts always may contest what Heaven determines.
Zhu Jinzong spoke from this point of view in his poem advocating the sinking
of wells:119
It is Earth gives birth to the sources of underground springs and of wells,
But the water in a reservoir pond always owes its existence to Heaven,
And Heaven, from time to time, puts a temporary end to Its rains.
The arteries deep in the Earth are not so subject to change.
Since the water drawn up from a spring can never be used to exhaustion
The Drought Demon then, so it follows, has no longer the power to
torture us.
Wang Ruyang’s poem on the creative skills of fashionable ﬂower-growers
declared that “Their ingenuity surpasses the Transforming Force, and inverts
the workmanship of Heaven.”120 In Li Zhan’s poem on the merchant Li
Benzhong, who spent the years 1805 to 1840 organizing, at his own expense, the
leveling and clearing of forty-eight dangerous passages on the towing-ways to
Guizhou in Hubei and Kuizhou in Sichuan, there are these heroic lines:121

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

445

By heating them with ﬁery coals he split stubborn rocks to clasts,
Flame-lights ﬂashing downward to the River God’s palaces,
While the ringing of his hammers ﬁlled the precipice-walled valleys.
...
He cleared away the hazards on both routes, step by step.
Once the human will is ﬁxed, then Heaven has no effect!
A similar attitude was explicitly taken towards deities such as the River God
Feng Yi. In Qin Lian’s poem on the rebuilding of the seawall along the
southern coast of Jiangsu, he celebrates it as122
Rising upward for a hundred feet, toward the towers of Heaven!
So if Feng Yi is angry, he will still not dare transgress,
And uncanny beasts beneath the sea will, in terror, hold their breath.
There was a sense that human life was a constant struggle against an everchanging environmental situation. The inherent instability of hydraulic
systems was the most striking example of this. As Lu Kuixun observed in
a poem on building dikes: “That which men can maintain is that which
Heaven destroys.”123 Zhang Jingcang, writing with immediate reference to
central Jiangxi (in the inland Southeast), but speaking generally, expressed the
same idea:124
A hundred-year-old levee will be broken open and gapped,
With water ﬂooding through it over swathes of fertile land.
Although our forebears built it, if it is not kept maintained.
Even spending a peck of gold a day will not see it long unchanged.
The hope was often expressed that the beneﬁts of each new project would, as
Zhang put it, “be imperishable throughout a thousand falls,” but it was for the
most part understood both that a major cause of this instability was human
intervention, and that a battle against nature was often practically unavoidable.
Zhou Kai described an all-too-familiar situation in his stanzas on “The Dikes
of the Yangzi”:125
Down from the ancient land of Shu descends the Mighty River,
Headlong along a hundred leagues, till it reaches Jiangling city,
An oceanic ﬂood, that roars like boulders crashing —
How could this be something that a single dike can vanquish?
The local peasants in defense of homesteads and of farms
Willingly commit themselves to contending with the waters:
From west to east, and east to west, along both river margins,
Dikes are constructed, strand by strand, the way they reweave hawsers.

446

Perceptions

Higher, and each day higher, mounts the current of the River,
And each day higher, too, the levees’ masses ascend.
Below one, spread about, one surveys the countless villages,
While above one, like a roof-beam, the water ﬂows suspended.
The language of warfare. The idea that the Chinese did not strive for an active
mastery of nature, which has been advocated by some scholars since at least
the time of Max Weber,126 is—as a simple generalization—ludicrously wrong.
On the other hand there was unquestionably an adaptationist tendency as
well, often interwoven with that of direct confrontation. This combination
may be seen in Chen Wenshu’s verses on ﬂood control:127
Controlling inundations is like controlling sickness:
One must trace the etiology right back to its beginnings.
Controlling inundations is like managing the military:
One must take consideration of every possibility.
...
But those who are in charge of handling ﬂoods today
Are not in any mood to see their task this way,
Unwilling to adapt themselves to patterns in terrain,
Or to adjust their interventions to the timing of the rains.
Faults that he much deplored.
Yuan Mei’s radical proposal to abandon altogether the tight control of the
lower reaches of the south-course Yellow River was an example of an adaptationist attitude taken toward a speciﬁc problem.128 The ‘cancers’ in the fourth
line probably refer to problems discussed in chapter 6: the accumulation of
alluvium that choked the sea mouth, and the deposits of sediment dropped by
the Yellow River across the conﬂuence where the Huai joined it, so partially
blocking the weaker river.
My personal conception of the Yellow River at present
Is that its current’s position-power is swelled by the Huai and Bian
Simply to support the grain going north by canal-borne transport,
Which constricts the River so tightly it makes it swell with cancers.
As humans have seized possession of what is the River’s territory,
Is it not that men and River have become each other’s enemy?
The body of the River’s bed keeps on piling up incessantly
So defenses, counterbalancing, must become more comprehensive.
The disaster of one morning, should our vigilance be weakened,
May easily cause us anguish, even to the year’s end.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

447

So why not open breaches up in the conducting channels
And magnanimously abandon one, or even more, departments,129
Then redirect the funds used now to pay for River management
To subsidize the cost of resettling the inhabitants?
We should see to the establishment of some transshipment
granaries,
And move the tribute grain along in a smaller size of craft
Which draw so little water that they skim the shallows with ease,
And our conﬂict with the River Huai from that moment on will
cease.
The Great River, on a roadway vast, will hasten to the sea,
And its inundation-sickness immediately be healed.
The idea behind these proposals, which Yuan admitted would “startle most
people,” seems to have been to restore an extensive ﬂood plain on which the
course of the lower Yellow River could move about easily, constantly abandoning
channels in which deposited sediment had accumulated and occupying new
ones. It showed a profound intuitive sense of the natural condition of the Yellow
River, but it is inconceivable that an already overpopulated Chinese society could
have left so much fertile alluvium forever untouched by agriculture.
A minor, but beautiful, voice was that advocating complete absorption into
the environment. Huang Heqing’s poem, “The Girl who Gathered the Flowers
of the Leek” is an evocation of this deep-ecological world-view:130
When the leek-ﬂower-gathering girl meets the elderly neighborhood
women,
With pitying faces they ask her, how, so young, she can bear such suffering?
“Wouldn’t you rather sit by the window and set the loom a-singing?
Why prefer you the untilled lands where the wastes are bright with dew,
Where the sun burns and the wind blows, giving such unspeakable pain?
Large leek-ﬂowers are everywhere, and one collects them ungrudgingly,
But, the livelong day, the ﬁner ﬂowers will not ﬁll a trug of bamboo.
If you sell to well-to-do households, the price is as cheap as dirt,
And the girls of these well-to-do households will disdain to give you good
day. . . .
When we do an exchange with you, our rice is mixed with husks.
When, ever, did the ﬂowers of leeks ﬁll up a hungry stomach?
We sigh for you most deeply, and the way you do yourself hurt.”
She thanks the aged women and says: “My fate is of no concern.
Human life is like a ﬂower, blown about and never still.

448

Perceptions

The slime-mold, exuding its trail of muck, does as ordained at its birth,
And the skirt a weaver wears herself will not cover over her shins,
Nor the plowman’s rice, though roughly hulled, reach to his steamer’s brim.
Wealth, and social position, have no hold over my heart.
The insects on smartweed are used to pain, and delight to be as they are.”
Bowing her head, she goes off to her picking. The day is already dark.
More commonplace is the conventional enlightenment evoked in Shao
Changheng’s poem on a ﬁsherman, adrift in the fall rains among the whitetufted reeds. He sits there unconcerned as to whether or not he catches a ﬁsh.
Or, if he catches one, whether or not he sells it.131
The educated Chinese mind looked on a landscape with a mixture of attitudes.
In ﬁrst place was an awareness of Heaven and the gods contriving its events,
and of the dragons and spirits concealed in its depths. This could be a halfsymbolic rather than a fully literal belief. Second was a historical consciousness of the human past that had both been shaped by a particular place and
contributed to its shaping. The third was a combination of natural history—
relating to the ﬂora, fauna, and geography—with metaphysical notions, often
laden with moralizing implications, relating to its physical and geomantic
structure and the forces running in its veins. In the ﬁnal section of this chapter,
I sketch something of these representational and interpretative ﬁlters.
Some writers saw the landscape as a body. Thus Zhu Shifa wrote a poem for
a friend of his who was a county magistrate, advocating the prohibition of
quarrying, presumably in the county under his friend’s jurisdiction:132
When a quarry’s opened up
The chisels’ and the axes’ clamor startles the Heavens above.
...
On the south side of the county a mountain range extends
That could be made to furnish your whole area’s protection,
But villains, hunting proﬁt, give the bureaucrats their bribes,
Who, once they’ve been corrupted, do whatever is required.
Every morning they’re extracting rock,
Deep in the wilderness.
Every evening they’re hacking rock,
Climbing a cliff face.
There are aspects of this process not unlike a human’s body
Being cut, till gouging’s penetrated deep inside its vital organs,
And the life force that sustains it is everywhere exhausted.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

449

Masons dangle hanging
From ropes of monstrous length,
Lashing bastinados
On the rock walls of a precipice.
The injunctions of Our Emperor have repeatedly adjured:
The mountains’ magic must be kept — forever — free of hurt.
While these magic powers rest unharmed, your folk are in good spirits,
And Your Honor’s virtue rises up as lofty as their pinnacles.
Even the rocks are thought of as alive, and their well-being, assured by the
ability to function properly and a healthy constitution, is linked with the wellbeing of the human population. This sense of an almost magical ecology can
also be found in a poem by Tang Sunhua, who ﬂourished at the end of the
seventeenth century, on three outstanding ofﬁcials, all of whom had been
governors of the poet’s own province of Jiangsu. Yuzhou in the ﬁrst line is,
roughly speaking, what is now He'nan province. It begins:133
The ancient heartland of Yuzhou holds the central region fast.
The Two Forces come together here. Its vitality’s in harmony.
Here, too, the Yellow River, and Luo, once presented mystic charts.
The powers enfolded in its peaks are uncanny, and their magic
Has engendered multitudes of men of superior moral caliber.
The ‘mystic charts’ were reputed to have been supernaturally revealed in
archaic times. The ‘Yellow River chart’ was a numerological diagram that is
thought to have inspired the Eight Trigrams, components of the structure of
the universe and of divination. It allegedly emerged from the Yellow River on
the back of a ‘dragon-horse’. The ‘Luo Text’, also numerological, came out from
the Luo, carried, so it was said, by a turtle, and was reputed to have inspired
the nine divisions of the ‘Great Plan’ in the Scripture of History.
This venerable hocus-pocus about the environment is used to explain the
high qualities of character possessed by the ﬁrst of these governors, Tang Bin,
who was born in the Yuzhou region. This was what prompted him to clear up
the superstitious miasma that reigned there. Tang Sunhua describes it as if it
was as much as a physical contamination as a religious one, spread through the
cult of deities not sanctioned by the state as orthodox:
Once into oblivion he’d swept temples vowed to ﬁlthy worship,
The demons living in the hills were rejected as monstrosities.
The aethers of orthodox belief cleansed the fogs of foul perversion.
True faith put public duty back among the folk in honor.

450

Perceptions

The health of a countryside required spiritual good housekeeping.
Just as landscape shaped history, so history also left its impress on the landscape. A poem by Fang Huan from a set of nine that he wrote on China’s
ancient frontiers contains these lines on what is today part of northern Hebei
province:134
Shanggu, now millennia ago, was where the Han camp was pitched.
In the deﬁles, where warriors’ banners waved, the aethers of killing linger.
In this view landscape and humankind intermingled through the mediation of
matter–energy–vitality.
The world was also full of daemonic beings. —I again use the old alternative form ‘daemonic’ to characterize supernatural beings that were not necessarily evil, even if some of them were on occasion hostile. The poem by Wang
Lianying on a break in the Yellow River dike conveys something of the multitude of these powers and their violence. It also suggests that to some extent
they might have been seen as having a symbolic character. How far Wang fully
believed in Feng Yi, the River God, or He Bo, the Earl of the Yellow River, or
Feng Long, the Lord of the Thunderbolts, is difﬁcult to say; but the references
to them, echoing ancient literature, must have been powerfully evocative. After
all, until near the end of the ﬁfth century bce, He Bo had received the annual
sacriﬁce of a human being. The place where Wang lived when young, and
referred to here, was Yongcheng in He'nan province. The words are put into
the mouth of an old man, remembering:135
“A whirlwind in the seventh month swept across three hundred miles.
Waves turned somersaults, sandbanks shifted, scattered clouds raced
along.
In the midst of the darkness the Yellow River rose equal to Heaven’s
height.
I was fourteen then. 1664. This was the day that dawned:
From in front of my bed came the roaring of the Yellow River’s
turbulence.
The lightnings ﬂashed, huge ﬁsh plunged forward, and winds bellowed
loud in fury.
Feng Yi rattled rolls on his timpani, and He Bo was venting his anger,
As Feng Long, Lord of the Thunderbolts, split open the gaping caverns.
First I beheld the whirlpools, as they drowned the shrubs and the
grasses,
Then slowly perceived Inundation Dragons, who had come to the
Ninefold Marshes.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

451

Sunk deep were mounts Huanyuan and Song, in the Water Treasury’s
depths. . . .
As the Candle Dragon blazed his light, the dragon hosts ascended.”
The hidden forces in the world made visible.
In another poem on ﬂoods and storms in the lake Tai region, by Zhu Heling,
the same kind of images are summoned up.136 The ‘tide wall’ refers to the tidal
bore in the nearby estuary of the Qiantang River.
The typhoon burst forth in its fury. The spirits and shades felt afﬂicted.
The Fire Dragon javelined his ﬂames, coercing the tide wall upriver.
As the sands swirled and boulders tumbled, the boundary banks had
vanished,
While houses were tossed and trees uprooted by the writhing waterdragons.
Often the poets were puzzled. Why had Heaven permitted, or caused, a
particular natural disaster? There was always an underlying assumption that
the punishment was deserved, and that Heaven was basically well-disposed
towards humankind; but they questioned the appropriateness of Its having
picked out this place, rather than that, for chastisement. Two lines of a poem
by Zhu Zhu encapsulate the respectful but interrogatory tone:137
If it’s the will of Heaven’s Lord to give amnesty to this region,
Why doesn’t He lash the dragons, force ﬂoods’ withdrawal, and fashion us
fertile ﬁelds?
Zhang Yanyi put the problem in a different perspective.138 The term translated
‘God’ is the ‘Lord’ in Chinese, implying ‘Lord Above’:
God’s heart has ever, from times long past, been loving and compassionate.
So why does He let the countless beings be thwarted or driven
backward?
Evil forces work at cross-purposes, and harmful aethers abound.
Time and again we’re in dire straits. Too many to be recounted.
Theodicy was also a problem for the Chinese. Chen Weisong, in a poem on an
earthquake that had caused numerous deaths, spoke of the deities Tianwu and
Zifeng “competing to see which of them could be foremost in sporting with
human beings”.139
The picture is complicated further by the need to take into account an
element of quasi-scientiﬁc analysis. The poem “A Record of Uncanny Events”
by Yang Xiheng shows the poet trying to develop a hydrological theory of
earthquakes in the context of various traditional metaphysical suppositions.140

452

Perceptions

His candidate for the troublemaker was Xuanming, a water-god connected
with the winter season. The Ai River mentioned later has proved impossible
to identify unambiguously. A plausible candidate is the hot spring rising
on Mount Ai, or Milfoil Mountain, in Shandong, which is appropriately
surrounded by other mountains. An alternative, but less likely, option is the
Aigun River in Manchuria, another name for the Amur.
The Earth is the Consort of Heaven,
Her Way should be peaceful and trustworthy,
Yet in this place, all of a sudden,
She trembled, and never stopped trembling.
As when a typhoon has struck — abrupt! —
But then, like the Thunder Chariot, rumbling.
...
I learned from investigation, looking through the histories and annals,
These changes are ‘manifestations of the Five Phases of Matter’.
Only superannuated pedants who hold fast to scriptural texts
Could think in such over-simple terms, and only in polemics.
No! The present era of our world is ruled by a Sage Intelligence,
So how from any moral cause could such disasters emanate?
Seeing this pattern-principle as being hard to penetrate,
I weighed the question carefully, when seated at my leisure.
On each of these occasions, after there’s been a quake,
The omens have pointed to Xuanming as the responsible deity.
Around the axis of the earth there circles Dark Force energy,
Though always eager to emerge, barred from rapidly ascending.
When there’s a minor earthquake, a little water percolates,
While a major one resembles a basin overturning.
When tested out repeatedly, this theory never fails.
I’ve long believed there’s evidence to give it a sound basis.
Thus the streams on Milfoil Mountain run sunk in a depression,
And east-to-west and north-to-south crisscross in all directions.
When accumulated runoff has caused an inundation,
Its position-power strives to make the mountain translocate.
The theories that an observer holds can inﬂuence his or her perceptions—
whether of stars or rock strata by the sea shore—and his or her feelings about
these perceptions. We may imagine that it was the same for Yang. Seismic
events were the stirrings of a hidden god.

Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives

453

Many interesting aspects have been left untouched by the preceding remarks.
To give but one illustration, there are a number of poems in The Bell of Poesy
that deal with animals. The predation of tigers on rural populations is documented,141 and so is the spectacle of villagers setting off on a tiger hunt, gongs
sounding, unarmed, but determined to overwhelm the predator by force of
numbers.142 There are lines on the peasants’ use of biological controls: wild
duck must not be netted, for example, whatever damage they do to crops,
because they keep the locust larvae in check.143 There are mentions of whales
peacefully spouting in the Yangzi estuary, in the remembered golden past of
the Yuan dynasty.144 There are evocations of the affection felt by peasants for
their plow oxen.145 Also a tribute to ‘Black Servant’ the cat, who was as resolute
as a tiger with rats, but a perfect gentleman—unlike the average pet—when it
came to sharing his food with a famished neighborhood moggy.146 All of these
are strands to be woven into the tapestry of environmental history.
Animals could also be used as symbolic vehicles for moralizing, as in some
lines by Zhu Yizun, that reveal a somber view of both the natural and human
worlds:147
The insect that lifts its wings to soar
Will soon be trapped in the spider’s orb.
The white deer, roaming through the wood,
Will be fortunate not to be shot and cooked.
The wise man is cautious what quarry to choose,
Lest greed make him victim of his own pursuit.
Above, unattainable, wings the wild goose.
May the bowman not himself be pierced by the shaft that he has loosed?
Most of the poems on nature in The Bell of Poesy evoke the struggle against
nature, as well as of that of humanity against human predators. Life had its happy
moments, but they were hard won. An example is Xu Rong’s long and evocative
farmer’s calendar on Leizhou in the Far South.148 The uncommonest attitude of
all, though it also exists, is that nature does not care about humankind one way
or the other. Here are a few such lines from Chen Yin’s “Singing my Feelings.”149
They stand out from a poem of otherwise conventional melancholy. ‘Frith’, by
the way, is a useful north Welsh word meaning the gentler lower slopes of a
mountain immediately above the ﬂoor of a valley. ‘Kine’ are cattle.
By the forest’s margins the small birds ﬂy,
On the frith of the hills lie the kine and sheep.
All things in themselves delight.
Man alone has many griefs.

Concluding Remarks

It is clear from the foregoing pages that by late-imperial times, and in some
cases much earlier, the Chinese environment was under signiﬁcant ‘pressure’
from human economic activities. But was this ‘pressure’ any more intense than
that on Europe’s environment around 1800? Or was it even conceivably less
intense, as Ken Pomeranz, focusing above all on England and the Netherlands,
has suggested?1 If an answer could be given to this question it would help us
to make an intelligent guess as to at least one aspect of the role played by environmental factors in Europe’s pioneering breakthrough into early modern
economic growth, and in China’s failure to do so independently.
The inverted commas are needed around ‘pressure’. As it stands, the notion
embodied in this word is fuzzy. More exactly, it is metaphorical. To be useful,
it has to be made operational in terms of a range of questions that at least in
theory can have precise answers. These questions also have to be thought of as
being addressed to a range of different areas or regions, with possibly different
answers. As we have seen, Zunhua was very different from Jiaxing, for example,
or from Guizhou. And the same was presumably true in premodern Western
Europe for, say, Sicily, the Netherlands, and Norway.
In these ﬁnal pages I offer some speculations as to how this comparative
issue might be approached. But it needs to be stressed that they are exactly
that—speculations, points for future discussion—not theses nailed to a
church door.
Let us begin by setting aside for the time being two of the important aspects
of an ecological system, namely, the complex interconnectedness of almost
everything with almost everything else, and nonlinear phenomena where the
proportions that hold between an input and an output do not stay constant

455

Concluding Remarks

regardless of the size of the input. Let us also begin by considering only
renewable resources. For premodern economies this sector is the predominant
one by far. We will bring in nonrenewables later, as they need slightly different
handling.
Let us, then, with these restrictions, just look at how one might approach a
single simple question: Over a short cycle of a year or several years, how much
recurring environmental ‘trouble’ does an economy create for itself, given a
particular technology at a particular time, and a particular region in which it
operates? ‘Trouble’ is deﬁned as the cost, over the short to medium run, of
restoring the productivity of the local environment to the same level of
economically useful output for a given input of work and investment as it had
at the start of this period. For purposes of making comparisons possible
between two or more systems we then convert this to the proportion prenewables
of total product that would be required if full restoration is to be effected,
which in practice it may not be.
Formally we could write this as
prenewables, (t) =

Rrenewables, (t)

(1),

O(t)

where Rrenewables, (t) is the cost of restoring the renewable resources used in the
period of time t, and O(t) is the value of output in the same period.
To illustrate: if you cut down trees for fuel or construction, what does it take
to regrow what has been removed? (Talking in this way of course bypasses
issues such as the difﬁculty of restoring habitats, of crucial importance for
activities like hunting and so on. Note also that it may exclude some of the
effects of cutting for clearance only.—For clearance the relevant restoration
cost per cycle may be that of keeping the ﬁelds clear.) If you construct an irrigation system, how much does it take each year, or each cycle of years, to clear
out the accumulated sediments in the ditches and repair the dikes, so that it
functions at least as well as it did during the year or cycle before? How much
does it take each year to restore the fertility of soils depleted by growing
crops—with an output equivalent to that from the original soil depth and
acreage, and level of application of fertilizer? And so on.
Often this restoration process will be partially neglected; in other cases
the cost will be too high to be paid, even if the participants would like to be able
to do so.‘Nonsustainability’ occurs when the cost of restoration plus subsistence
exceeds total income. In symbols,
Rrenewables (t) + S(t) > O(t)
Insuperable technical problems are deemed to have indeﬁnitely large costs.
Thus the early-imperial Zheng-Bai irrigation system in what is today Shaanxi

456

Concluding Remarks

quite soon became impossible to restore in full, because of hydrological
problems seemingly insoluble with premodern techniques, though great efforts
were intermittently made.2 Some late-imperial attempts to introduce irrigated
farming into the arid Northwest likewise rapidly became impractical because
what little ground water there was was drawn to the surface by capillary action
and there evaporated leaving heavily salinated and unfarmable soil, the former
farmers on occasion being reduced to stock rearing or even gathering wild
plants to survive. (See pages 439–40 above.)
Many side-effects of the exploitation of nonrenewable resources can also be
included in the required process of restoration. If the use of coal is partially
substituted for that of wood for fuel, as happened both in early modern
Western Europe and in a few parts of late-imperial China,3 preventing, or at
least so far as possible compensating for, the ill-health to miners and members
of the population inhaling air laden with coal particles is a far from trivial cost.
People, considered as producers, are also part of the productive system that
may need a form of ‘restoration’.
‘Pressure’ is thus calculated in terms of the cost of the human component of
a restoration that is complete in economic terms, supplementing as needed
any restoration effected by nature. (An interesting example of the combination
is fallowing. All that is needed for the fallow ﬁeld to recover is human abstention, but this may in fact have a cost in income foregone.) ‘Relative pressure’ is
the proportion that this represents (or would, if effected, represent) of an
economy’s total income. These measures apply over a span of time short
enough to avoid the need to consider technological changes. At a given level of
income per person, relative pressure is expressed by p, an approximate indicator of the relative ease of sustainability, but it seems likely that a rich society
would ﬁnd it easier to pay a given percentage of its income for restoration than
a poor one. The rate of change of relative pressure per cycle is also a signiﬁcant,
and different, measurable quantity. It may obviously be decreasing, stable, or
increasing, depending on circumstances. Over one discrete interval of time
this rate of change can be measured as
p(t) – p(t–1)
p(t–1)
The basic deﬁnition just given is not without its ambiguities. For example,
if a peasant grows legumes for part of the year in his rice ﬁelds these will help
to replace lost organically accessible nitrogen but also yield an edible crop. Is
this a part of the cost of remedying the environmental trouble caused by ricegrowing? Clearly in some sense, yes, because it is close to unavoidable in an
intensive system not practicing fallowing, but also, equally obviously, not

Concluding Remarks

457

entirely. For the moment we note the presence of this sort of problem but leave
it to one side as not affecting the core issue.
The mental model that lies behind this way of looking at the issue can be
illustrated from Zhou Xipu’s account of the salinization of farmlands in a part
of Gansu that was too arid to be suited to the Chinese style of cultivation.4 This
was cited in the preceding chapter, but is worth repeating in briefer form as the
context is quite different:
I was deputed to inspect a disaster caused by hail at Xiangshan. . . . To reach
it I had to traverse a terrain of fractured rocks. I was unable here to exchange
my money for grain and fodder. On asking the reason for this, I learned that
the people who live in these mountains eat peng grasses. . . . I ordered some
to be boiled and served to me. Their taste was rank, and so astringent that I
could hardly get them down my throat; yet the frontier people eat them
from one year’s end to the next. . . . Humans eating grasses is a strangely
desperate circumstance.
He followed these observations with a poem, some of whose lines show what
had happened. In the words he put into the mouth of one of the locals:
“After the snowmelt, mud in the sands is all that we have to drink,
Yet, in times gone by, our forebears here managed both plowing and
ridging.
Countless hoes chopped at the hill. — Then the hills’ arteries changed,
And, as the ﬁrst sprouts opened, so too did saline ﬂakes.
They tell tales as well of mosquito larvae, huge as caterpillars’ pupae.
The state-given hoes were tossed away, as triﬂes no longer useful.
We sons, and grandsons, eat peng grass now, in order to stay alive.
One meal a day, for people are many, but grasses in short supply.
In hunger our guts turn round and round, like silk-reeling wheels a-crying.
Not long ago we sought pasturage on the west hills’ lower slopes
To graze our sheep and cattle there, and good returns were hoped for:
Meat for consumption and oxen’s hides to serve as clothing cover,
And surplus resources for famine congee boiled up out of the husks.
Once the disastrous hailstones struck, in a moment this turned to nothing.
...
We have had to look to the peng grass again. Alas! It is all that is left.”5
Excessive pressure on the local environment, and its consequent reaction,
which turned out to be too violent for any affordable restoration, forced them
to try a shift in technology, to a more nearly exclusive reliance on stock rearing;

458

Concluding Remarks

but climatic unpredictability in turn made this at least temporarily unviable.
This is an extreme example. Normally the problems made themselves felt much
more slowly, and were mostly manageable at the cost of a payable proportion
of income.
Nonrenewable resources, such as iron, copper, and coal, cannot—by
deﬁnition—be looked at in the same way. The cyclical restoration of the actual
productive capacity (including its potential) at the start of a cycle is not
possible, even in theory. Assuming a constant level of technology, the pressure
on the environment can be approximated over a short period of time by the
rate of change per cycle in the cost needed to produce the same output as in the
preceding cycle. This can of course be zero, or, if new and easily used supplies
are found, even negative. The commonest pattern in the absence of technical
change, namely increasing cost over time, was summed up in a few lines from
Wang Taiyue’s poem on the eighteenth-century copper mines in Yunnan, also
quoted earlier but translated here with a slightly different emphasis:6
Deeper each day, and deeper down, they sink galleries to the ore,
Concerned, even as they chip it free, they’ll hit rock too hard to break.
The output that, in earlier times, took no more than a morning
Requires now nothing less from them than ten full days of labor.
In a rough-and-ready way we can regard any increase per cycle in the cost
needed to extract a nonrenewable resource in the same quantity at the same
functional quality (energy output in the case of coal, for example) as in the
previous cycle as a measure of the ‘trouble’ being caused by the ‘resistance’, so
to speak, of the environment to human economic activities. We represent this
change in actual (not relative) cost by Cnonrenewables or Cn for short.
Aggregating the restoration cost per cycle of the system of renewable resources
(farming, forestry, livestock rearing, and so on) with the sum of the increases
(or decreases) in costs for a comparable mix of output per cycle for all the
various types of nonrenewable resources (such as metal ores, coal, and quarried
stone), and determining the percentage this represents of total output per cycle,
gives a ﬁrst approximation to a single quantitative measure of the ‘environmental pressure’ exerted by an economy during a short period of time in which
other factors, like technology and organizational structure, can be taken as
given. ‘Short’ may in fact be usefully deﬁned in terms of the absence of
signiﬁcant change in these other components of the productive system. The
measure thus created for comparison between systems may be called ‘the aggregate pressure proportion’ to distinguish it from the various other types that are
mostly amounts of money or else rates of change and, in all cases, either partial
and/or nonrelative in character.

459

Concluding Remarks

Equation (1) (on p. 455) now becomes
pr+n, (t) =

(Rr, (t) + Cn, (t))

(2).

O(t)

The formulae deﬁning the point of nonsustainability and the rate of change
in environmental resistance can now be rewritten in the obvious way to give
the complete measure. Some of the implications of this way of thinking need
to be sketched in brieﬂy.
Increasing population, with no change in technology, will normally require
additional costs in the form of accessing new resources and the use of additional ‘natural services’ (such as the neutralization or removal of increased
wastes), if resource usage per person is to stay at least constant. Besides land,
water, and fuels, these include resources underpinning the additional investment needed in tools, overheads, education, and training. Under some
circumstances additional labor power can make a disproportionately large
positive economic contribution, and in such circumstances this can decrease
the proportionate pressure on the environment. There is no reason to think
that this applied to late-imperial China.
For a given spatial unit, cross-boundary movements of goods and people (in
other words, cross-boundary trade and migration) will also usually tend to
alter the proportionate pressure on the environment.7 But here there is no
necessary single pattern.
Once the short run is left behind, changes in the technology being used can
either reduce or increase the proportionate pressure on the environment.
Innovation can make the use of a resource more efﬁcient, as with the production of more usable work per unit of energy input for example, which will
cause total product to rise to a greater degree than input of the resource, so
reducing the pressure proportion, other things being equal. New techniques
can also open up whole new areas of the environment to exploitation that were
previously all but untouched. Deep-sea ﬁshing and whaling are examples. This
will, other things being equal, also tend to reduce the pressure proportion, at
least initially, because it is characteristic of new resource areas to yield relatively high returns for effort expended. Today, the restoration of the earlier
productivity of either of these activities, which have come to be based on seriously depleted renewable resources, would require above all the loss of income
from abstention in order to allow natural forces to promote recovery to the
extent possible.
In dealing with nonrenewables the inclination to think in terms of the longterm running down of stocks of a given size has to be resisted. Market demand
may over a long period, step by step, make it commercially viable to extract a

460

Concluding Remarks

resource of a quality so low that previously it was not commercially viable to
do so. A stock of a resource is thus not a simple given physical quantity,
approached asymptotically as the rate of successful exploration for fresh
reserves falls toward zero. Technological change can both alter the relationship
between the quality of a resource and its commercial viability, and also make
an old resource economically irrelevant by ﬁnding a much cheaper functional
substitute. These are some of the reasons the measures suggested here are
virtually ‘point’ measures, to be determined for short periods of time as far as
possible from information relating to these short periods.
The real-life problem is, however, that other things are often far from equal.
And also that the middle or even long run can be needed to establish what the
costs actually are. Technical progress often brings a larger absolute proportion
of an environment into contact of some sort with productive processes, and,
especially in modern times, often conjures up side-effects that are hard to
detect at ﬁrst, as well as important new nonlinear effects that require time
for the crucial thresholds of a causal input to be crossed. This increasingly
complicates proper measurement and the calculation of the impact of causal
linkages. In economic terms, the bottom line is that it becomes harder and
harder to know what the real price is that is being paid.
And, we might also add, by whom, and where, and when?
Bearing these analytical ideas in mind, what then can be suggested, in a preliminary way, about China and Europe, given that the quantitative research needed
for a quantitative assessment in these terms has not so far been attempted?
In summary, provided we restrict ourselves to the agricultural cores of the
two economies, it seems likely that in late-imperial China the pressure on
the environment as deﬁned above was much higher than in Western Europe
overall around the end of the eighteenth century, and fairly probably somewhat higher than in England and the Netherlands, though less unarguably so.
Why?
First, some general considerations. The extent of unavoidable hydraulic
maintenance work, including not only irrigation with its multiple channels,
barrages, reservoirs, and sluices, but also the huge ﬂood-protection levees and
seawalls, plus canals for transport, was much greater in China than in the West.
(There was only a limited amount of irrigated farming in most of earlymodern Europe, notably in a few special parts of Italy and Spain, and only a
handful of modest-length canals, originally mainly in Italy and France, then
later also in England. The Netherlands, a large part of which was built on water
control, was a special and important exception.) Water-control systems almost
always have maintenance costs that seem high in absolute terms, though

Concluding Remarks

461

evaluating these costs as a proportion of output, which is the crucial analytical
step, is work still to be undertaken. Qualitative evidence, a fraction of which
has been presented here in chapter 6 on water, suggests that this expenditure
could on occasion hurt seriously, even if the extreme cases that tended to be
preferentially recorded are not a sure guide to average values.
Likewise most Chinese farming was more, or much more, intensive in its use
of land than most European farming. Maintaining the ‘power of the soil’, as it
was called, was a constant concern of lowland farmers, and the collection,
creation, and application of fertilizers and river mud virtually universal.
Lowland seed-to-yield ratios, at least for rice (barely grown in Europe) and
under different climatic conditions, were however probably several times
higher than for wheat in Europe, as shown in chapter 7 on Jiaxing. If this was
so, it would have made an investment of time and effort in restoration that was
at least several times greater no more than comparable in relative terms.
For upland farmers, many of whom practiced a shifting cultivation of a lesser
intensity, the equivalent cost was that of every few years gaining access to, and
preparing, new land for temporary use that would replace the exhausted land
that was for the time being no longer viable. Over the short term, such
land approximated to a nonrenewable resource, and the probable relative cost
is for the moment once again opaque. My guess though is that, outside this
shifting upland agriculture, the relative burden (system restoration as a proportion of income) was heavier in China, even though it is important to note the
present opacity of the proportions of income used for it. This is above all
because, both in the irrigated and in the rainfall-farming parts of China, there
was virtually no fallowing, and this meant that human effort had to do here a
part of what nature did in the West in restoring vitality to the ﬁelds.
Do such geographically aggregated answers make any environmental sense at
all? Can we, one way or another, meaningfully ‘add’, say, the lower Yangzi valley
to Gansu to Yunnan, or the Netherlands to Sicily to Norway? My inclination on
this last point is to be skeptical, and to suspect that environmental comparisons
are best limited to comparing approximate like with like. Thus the Netherlands
and the lower Yangzi valley might, perhaps, be at least considered as reasonable
candidates, but not the bigger aggregates. This is yet another caveat.
Second, such general probabilities aside, is there any contemporary comparative evidence?
Surprisingly, the answer is ‘yes’. The Jesuit missionaries who were based in
Beijing through the greater part of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
were personally familiar both with at least some parts of China and at least some
parts of Europe. Collectively they were present in the capital for a substantial
length of time, though their most important observations on the environment

462

Concluding Remarks

relate mainly to the middle of the eighteenth century. They also had a good
knowledge of the Chinese language, and of Chinese history and culture.
How reliable was Jesuit information?
The notes and essays on China they published in Europe were intended to
advertise the Jesuit cause, and probably, by implication, the success of their
culturally adaptive methods in gaining access to the political power ruling
the most populous nation in the world. In many respects they also
unabashedly used China as a model whose thrift, diligence, propriety, lack of
conspicuous consumption and waste, relatively humane treatment of
servants, and general good sense could be used to criticize Europe, besides
being a source of useful practical techniques and interestingly different ways
of seeing the world.
For example, they held up to admiration the avoidance by Chinese artists of
the infatuation of European painters with the nude, just as they found becomingly modest the limited presence of the better class of Chinese women in
public places and their seclusion in the home. In a more radical mode, they
contrasted favorably the appointments made to high ofﬁce in China on the
basis of merit (the imperial family excepted) with the practice of doing so on
the basis of heredity in most of Europe. Some comments were by implication
revolutionary. Noting how large a proportion of Chinese peasants owned their
own lands, one author felt prompted to write that “the great misery of our
France is that the farmers do not own any of their lands in freehold, while
those to whom these guarantee a certain revenue think of nothing but their
enjoyment of it.”8 As self-conscious aesthetic iconoclasts, they also extolled the
Chinese art of the ‘natural’ garden in contrast to the stiff symmetries of its
continental European counterpart, brought to life, so far as it was, by statues
rather than by the subtle use, Chinese style, of ﬂowing water. The fathers, as
one might expect, thus had certain ideological orientations, but their views
were by no means always conservative or conventional, and certainly not
mechanically predictable.
In reading what they wrote about what they saw, it is necessary to be aware
of these inclinations, but there does not seem to have been any particular ideological prejudice distorting their views on the economy and the environment.
At most, the prospect from Beijing may have at times inclined them to mistake
imperial intentions for Chinese social reality, or local for general practices.
Thus one memoir asserts that:9
The Chinese have an excellent understanding of the economic policing of
the woods. One may not cut anything down without planting [a replacement]; and in the capital the owner does not have the right to decide what
is to be done with the old construction timbers of a house. If they can still

Concluding Remarks

463

serve for building they must continue to be used for this purpose. There is
no option to cut them into pieces.
The ﬁrst part of the second sentence, that in general no wood could be cut
without planting its replacement, was certainly not universally the case.
It is thus probably safer to be guided by the general impressions that emerge
from their pages rather than take particular assertions as necessarily dependable. Suitable caution observed, though, scattered passages in the sixteen
volumes of their Mémoires concernant les Chinois (to give the collection its
usual abbreviated title) are an almost unique source for our quest for comparisons. The juxtaposition of China with Europe was explicitly part of the
project from the beginning.10 China, opined the notice at the start of the ﬁrst
volume, “has not been less rich than we are, nor less happy, but maybe even
more so.”11 That introducing the ﬁfth volume likewise noted that readers
would wish “to judge Europe by China, and China by Europe.”12
The most important single text is probably an excursus embedded in a
memoir on interest rates in the Chinese economy:13
In France, the land rests every other year. In many places there are vast tracts
under fallow. The countryside is broken up by woods, meadows, vineyards,
parks, and lodges for recreation,14 etc. Nothing of this sort could exist
here. . . . Even if the land is exhausted by thirty-ﬁve centuries of harvests, it
has to provide a new one every year to supply the urgent needs of a countless
population. This excess of population . . . here increases the need for farming
to the point of forcing the Chinese to do without the help of cattle and herds,
because the land that would feed these latter is needed for feeding people.
This is a great inconvenience as it deprives them of fertilizer for the soil, meat
for the table, horses, and almost all the advantages that can be gained from
herds. Were it not for the mountains and the wetlands China would be
absolutely without the beneﬁt of woods, and without venison and game. Let
us add that it is the strength and application of human beings that meets all
the costs of farming [here]. More labor and more people are needed to obtain
the same quantity of grain than are required elsewhere. The total quantity
surpasses the imagination, but even so it is no more than sufﬁcient. . . .
Pigs and poultry provide almost the only meat in China, which means
that the consumption per person is not great. . . . We have said ‘almost’
because we are talking of the empire as a whole. . . . Some districts are, as it
happens, better provided for in this respect, and support numerous herds.
In some, people even plow with cattle, water buffalo, or horses. Overall,
though, proportionate to the size [of the two countries] there are at least ten
head of cattle in France for every one in China. . . .

464

Concluding Remarks

Let us note, nonetheless, that every year Manchuria provides Beijing and
the entire metropolitan province with a prodigious amount of cattle, sheep,
and deer. . . . And that necessity . . . has taught our Chinese to take advantage of many vegetables, herbs, plants, and roots that grow of their own
accord in the countryside and need no cultivation. . . . Although not much
land can be used for orchards or gardens, the enclosures around houses, the
avenues of the villages, and the hillslopes provide a supplement. The
majority of the provinces would be at the level of the best-endowed
provinces of France but for the fact that the extreme size of the population
swings the balance in France’s favor.
The author (who is not identiﬁed) goes on to note that the Chinese wore fewer
clothes than the French when the weather was warm enough to permit this.
Timber, too, he says, “would be more than sufﬁcient but for its heavy
consumption for the building of the boats with which the major rivers are
covered.” And, “as regards heating, the coal mines and skill in the handling of
ﬁre make the shortage of wood in places far removed from the mountains
almost impossible to detect.”15
The burden of maintenance, which lies at the heart of the deﬁnition of pressure on the environment proposed here, is the focus of another passage, probably from the hand of another author:16
The Chinese are too much farmers, and too rich in experience, not to have
observed that there are improvements, renovations, and, as they put it,
remoldings of the terrain that change its nature, giving it an unreal and
artiﬁcial fertility from which great beneﬁts can be derived. In their view,
however, ﬁrst, these sorts of undertakings only succeed to the degree that
they are appropriate to the nature of the soil and the lie of the land; second,
they are extremely expensive, requiring much careful attention; and, third,
no matter how well they have been done, and whatever the success with
which they have been crowned, they should never be expected to last for
ever. Sooner or later everything has to be started over again. The foregoing
does not refer [only] to [projects like] the draining dry of marshes. It applies
to nothing other than lands, ﬁelds, gardens, and orchards that are [already]
under full cultivation.
Population pressure and population size are both recurrent themes in the
Mémoires. Another writer, probably different from the preceding, says:17
A hundred and twenty years of peace have so increased the population that
the pressing need for survival has caused the plow to enter all those lands
where there has been the slightest hope of a harvest. Hard work has outdone

Concluding Remarks

465

itself and gone so far as to create amphitheaters of harvests on the slopes of
the mountains, to convert sunken marshes into rice-paddies, and to gather
harvests even from the midst of the waters by means of inventions of which
Europe has as yet not an inkling.
In some areas the density of the use of the land was astonishing. Thus a
Chinese ofﬁcial is cited with approval as saying:18
“Has anyone who has traveled in certain parts of Zhejiang province failed to
observe that the ditches and canals yield a harvest of very useful aquatic
roots? That the edges of all the roads are planted with various trees? That the
hedges have been made of wild bushes whose small fruits have many uses?
That the paths through the ﬁelds are trimmed, as far as the eye can see, with
cotton shrubs, maize, or other useful plants, depending on the time of year?
That villages that look from afar off like thickets are well protected from the
spells of ﬁerce summer heat by the fruit trees set about the houses and their
enclosed yards? That the wildest hills, and the most precipitously banked
rivers, have become decorative on account of the trees and bushes with
which they are covered? That there are mulberry trees for silkworms everywhere they can grow? And that those marshes that no one knows how to
drain dry provide the choicest reeds, and large-leafed plants that are
extremely helpful. . . . Why is our France not in a similar condition, at least
in her more beautiful provinces?”
The ﬁnal rhetorical question of course implies that this was not the case in
France.
Of course such an intense usage of the land was not found everywhere in
China. A letter from a missionary just arrived from Europe to a colleague
about his journey from Canton to Beijing contains the remark, with strong
overtones of disillusionment, that on the way north to the border of Jiangxi
province, “in a country that people would like to think the equal of France, I
saw neither forests, not fountains, nor gardens, nor fruit trees, nor vines, nor
lodges for recreation.”19 When he had crossed over into Jiangxi, he said,20
I saw arid mountains reaching to the horizon, and, lower down, almost no
cultivable land. I expressed my surprise at this to my interpreter and to the
ofﬁcial who was leading us. I remarked that, judging from the accounts I
had read of China, I had envisaged that it resembled a vast garden cultivated
with much art and devotion; that the mountains were cut into terraces and
laden with rice or wheat from the base to the summit, constituting one of
its ﬁnest ornaments and its principal wealth.

466

Concluding Remarks

His Chinese companions laughed at him when he said this and assured him
there were mountains like these in most parts of China. The prospects that he
had anticipated only appeared at the start of the section of the Grand Canal
going north from the Yangzi River:21
Here we are at last in the good part of China. This is the land that lies between
the two great rivers, the Yangzi and the Yellow. It is ﬁfty leagues from south to
north, and there is no question of mountains. This landscape is as level as a
mirror all the way to the horizon. The soil has several crops a year, and all the
ﬁelds have them at the same time, a striking sight that we do not have in
Europe, where some portion of the land is always resting under fallow. For
this reason all the land is exceptionally densely populated.
These large numbers had their uses. According to the writer cited earlier on the
increase in the population:22
The public works that exist in the form of dikes, levees, canals, locks, and
jetties along the banks of the Yellow River, the Yangzi, the Wei, etc., are so
numerous, so unending, and so difﬁcult to maintain, that they both presuppose and prove the existence of an immense population. The Europe with
which we are acquainted has nothing [to show] that might shed doubt on
this conception.
In a certain tension with this was the prevalence of rural underemployment
emphasized by the author of the memoir on interest rates:23
The large population, something so much desired elsewhere, is here a
scourge, and the foremost cause of all revolutions. Whether the farmers
cultivate their own lands, as most do [at least in north China], or those
owned by others, they barely have enough on which to live pleasantly, even
when the land responds in the optimal fashion to their care for it and hard
work. This care and hard work are not enough to keep most of them busy
around the whole year, especially in the southern provinces. This has caused
the extension of the crafts of necessity and of painstaking toil into the countryside. As for those who farm the ﬁelds of others, they keep a larger share
for themselves than do their counterparts in other countries.
The implication of this last remark seems to be that the amount produced
from a family’s rented lands was so low in terms of the family’s needs that they
had to keep a larger proportionate share if they were to survive.
Hence, too, the famous garden-style agriculture:24
It may be of some use to observe that the little efforts and knacks, inventions, and discoveries, resources and combinations, that have created what

Concluding Remarks

467

seem like miracles in gardens have here been transported on an increased
scale into the countryside, and done wonders there . . . as witness manures,
which have become so varied, so multiplied, so abundant, so easy to use, so
effective, and so well combined.
In general, these time-consuming reﬁnements can also be seen as part of the
process of offsetting the cyclical environmental losses caused by economic
production. But we have to be careful not to apply this ﬁnding too automatically. There were probable exceptions:25
Our France is prodigiously fertile in water plants of all species. Why does
she then not proﬁt from these gifts that Nature has lavished on her? What is
the reason that this Chinese taste, which is so sensible, does not take hold
among us, and does not lead us to ﬁnd, as they do, a decoration for our
gardens and an annual harvest that needs no work for our farmers?
It would seem from this that, where agriculture was concerned, early modern
northwestern Europe may have exploited a more restricted range of possible
resources than did China. If, however, we keep to the deﬁnition of pressure
adopted here, a harvest like this needing little or no labor to alter a natural
system would seem, because it increased total output by making use of an
ecosystem that caused essentially no reactive ‘trouble’, probably to represent a
reduction in the aggregate proportionate pressure on China’s ecosystem.
If there was one theme that inspired the fathers to rhetoric about the
Chinese handling of the environment like no other it was that the changes
wrought by humans in the landscape were always in conformity with Nature:26
[I]f people here have drained the marshes dry, and led water into ﬁelds,
carried the soil from below up to the hills above and that from the hills
down to the plains, ﬂooded some districts for a time while removing all
their waters from others, even to the point that they are scorched by the sun
in the dog days of summer, if they have made openings in ranges of hills to
let the air circulate more immediately, or blocked up small gorges to stop
torrents that cause people misery, if they have felled all the large trees on one
side to allow the rays of the sun to penetrate to depths too deeply sunk [to
receive them before], and broken up with [tree-lined] avenues plains that
are too bare, so as to bring them shade and freshness, if extended hillsides
have been shaped into amphitheaters, the better to handle harvests on them,
and if valleys have been furrowed with levees and level beds, the better to
handle the rivers in them, if people have dreamed up so many ways of
joining together or splitting apart, forcing to rise or to fall, to repel or to
beckon, to contain or to distribute all kinds of waters, and if, ﬁnally, they

468

Concluding Remarks

have taken gardens and orchards out to the midst of [grain] harvests,
pastures to the midst of forests, ﬁelds to the midst of ponds, and lines of
rocks to the midst of motionless waters, with clumps of reeds along their
shores, this has been only to supplement or to imitate Nature, as the men of
ancient times did, and, like them, to match what she has done.
The verses quoted in the second half of the preceding chapter showed that
this was, as a generalization, at best an overly simple view of the multifaceted
late-imperial Chinese conceptions of Nature. At worst it was unwarranted
romanticism. It remains evidence, though, for the exceptional extent of the
transformation of the landscape, as seen through Western European eyes, but
we would probably want to interpret it differently. Bearing in mind that there
are always local variations and exceptions in environmental matters, the likelihood is that, in general, the late-imperial tendency to try to extend farming
into places where it was inherently difﬁcult, and sustain it there, increased the
costs of restoring the original levels of productivity and hence the proportionate pressure. And the astonishment of the Jesuit observers at what they saw
implies that this tendency was probably more pronounced in China than in
Western Europe. And that, as one of them wrote, “since mountainous and arid
areas are little suited to farming, only an extreme need would drive people to
seek for harvests from them.”27
The authors of the Mémoires also enthused about the widespread use of
human excrement for manure, in part because its rapid removal to the farms
(where it was usually matured before use) left Chinese cities cleaner than their
Western counterparts at this time.28 The demand for this material meant that
“in all the quarters of Beijing, and almost all the cities in China, there are
public conveniences that save the streets from the ﬁlthy habits of those who
come and go, and that [the cities] are not infected by the latrines.” Europe’s
record was less good:
Our medicine has had to be concerned in our cities with many illneses that
are unknown in the countryside. . . . [I]t is our view that the more people
study the nature of the air and its instantaneous action on our bodies, the
more they will become persuaded that streets that are narrow, constricted,
and bordered by extremely high houses that are almost always dirty and
stinking, must change it and corrupt it. . . , and that [our rarely emptied]
public conveniences, so numerous and so infected, are the means of introducing into it these germs of sicknesses and death. . . . Our Europeans, who
have noticed that illnesses and epidemics are very rare in China . . . have not
observed that the manner in which the cities are constructed must
contribute much to this state of affairs.

Concluding Remarks

469

This dovetails with another often enunciated theme, that “the population of
the Empire is today so great that the pressing interest of the common need
requires that people extract from the fertility of the land and the hard work of
human beings all that can be extracted from them.”29
It also ﬁts with the later observations of the German agronomist Wilhelm
Wagner in the early twentieth century that the avoidance of the exhaustion of
the Chinese soil was due above all to the painstaking collection and use of
waste of all kinds. Although the relative paucity of large farm animals required
the use of human excrement as a manure, it was also true that:30
The Chinese use the greatest care in the gathering of animal dung as much
as for human. To this end the peasant goes off on the roads in the winter, or
at other times in the year when he is idle, with a basket on his shoulder and
a spade in his hand, and looks for manures.
In contrast to the practice in Europe, manure was also applied in China to
every crop, not just to the more important ones. Although the major input was
at the time of sowing, further dressings were normally applied during growth,
and up to as many as four times, which Wagner seems to imply was also
distinctive.31 He regarded as revealing the observation of the earlier geographer
Von Richtofen that even thirteen years of fallow had not allowed the areas in
Zhejiang province laid waste and depopulated by the Taiping rebels in the mid
nineteenth century to recover their productivity, and that the re-establishment
of farming had been achieved in proportion to the availability of human
manure from the reviving population.32
More generally, Wagner stressed with regard to the ﬂood-plain lands that
were, and are, the heartland of Chinese farming that preserving their
fertility necessitated “the gigantic burdens of labor that are inherent in the
arable land thus reclaimed and that are bestowed on it afresh every year.”33
He added to the items that have already been touched on above the important but wearisome need to rebuild the level surface of the ﬁelds each year,
commonly after river mud rich in nutrients had been spread across them,
because such a horizontal surface reduced the runoff during the violent
summer rains, so in turn limiting the loss of topsoil, and of course also made
irrigation possible where rice was grown.34 Without water-control systems
to facilitate drainage, many of the most productive parts of China would
in his view revert to being “fever-ridden and uninhabitable swamps,” and
here and there neglect of the maintenance of drainage had actually caused
this to happen.35
There is a need in the future for a more precise and detailed study of the
facts relating to these these questions. Overall, though, the Jesuit evidence,

470

Concluding Remarks

buttressed by Wagner’s later observations, makes a persuasive prima facie case
that the ‘pressure’ of the late-imperial Chinese productive system on the
natural environment, as deﬁned above in terms of the ‘aggregate pressure
proportion’, was signiﬁcantly heavier than that at least of France around the
beginning of the modern era. This can probably be extended, though with less
certainty, to other parts of northwestern Europe.
Patterns of economic causation can be counterintuitive at times, but it
would seem reasonable to believe something like the following, if only in a
tentative way. First, when compared with the situation in early-modern
Western Europe, the relative cost of environmental restoration after each cycle
of production was signiﬁcantly greater in late-imperial China. This was
combined with the need in China actually largely to effect this restoration in a
region where the resources relevant to traditional technology were already
close to being fully exploited, and there were no new imperial overseas
resources, such as some European countries possessed, and that could be
drawn on like an environmental overdraft without any immediate need for full
restoration. Likewise China had reached a moment in time at which the
potential for further improvements within the old technology without
recourse to an external modern science was virtually exhausted.36 This
complex of causes tended greatly to slow down the Chinese speed of response
to the challenge of modernizing of the rural economy when it became critical
in and after the later nineteenth century as the Western–Japanese political and
economic challenge became ever more pressing. And, apart from special
enclaves like Shanghai that were able follow with some success a partially
independent path because of their access to foreign know-how and capital, the
brake on the immense rural sector slowed the advance toward modernity of
the economy as a whole.
Such seems to have been the uncomfortable legacy of the empirical aspects
of the thrice-millennial environmental history reconstructed in these pages.
Finally, the history of values and ideas as outlined here presents a problem.
A problem not just for our understanding of China’s past but for environmental history generally. The religious, philosophical, literary, and historical
texts surveyed and translated in the foregoing pages have been rich sources of
description, insight, and even, perhaps, inspiration. But the dominant ideas
and ideologies, which were often to some degree in contradiction with each
other, appear to have little explanatory power in determining why what seems
actually to have happened to the Chinese environment happened the way it
did. Occasionally, yes. Buddhism helped to safeguard trees around monasteries. The law-enforced mystique shrouding Qing imperial tombs kept their
surroundings untouched by more than minimal economic exploitation. But in

Concluding Remarks

471

general, no. There seems no case for thinking that, some details apart, the
Chinese anthropogenic environment was developed and maintained in the
way it was over the long run of more than three millennia because of particular characteristically Chinese beliefs or perceptions. Or, at least, not in
comparison with the massive effects of the pursuit of power and proﬁt in the
arena provided by the possibilities and limitations of the Chinese natural
world, and the technologies that grew from interactions with them.
So, if such a view survives further scrutiny, the question arises: Was China,
among the great developed premodern civilizations of the world, unique in
this? And if not, what does this imply for the realism, or otherwise, of the hope
that we can escape from our present environmental difﬁculties by means of a
transformation of consciousness?

13
Notes

Primary sources are identiﬁed by initials in italic capitals, and may be found in the ﬁrst
section of the Bibliography.

Introductory Remarks
1. For a brief but deeply informed sketch of the earliest historical period see D. Keightley,
“The environment of ancient China,” in M. Loewe and E. Shaughnessy, eds., The
Cambridge History of Ancient China (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1999).
2. See, for example, J. Lee and Wang Feng, “Malthusian models and Chinese realities: The
Chinese demographic system 1700–2000,” Population and Development Review 25 (1)
1999; J. Lee and Wang Feng, One Quarter of Humanity: Malthusian Mythology and
Chinese Realities, 1700–2000 (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1999); T.-J.
Liu, et al., eds., Asian Population History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001); and
M. Elvin, “Blood and statistics: Reconstructing the population dynamics of late imperial China from the biographies of virtuous women in local gazetteers,” in H. Zurndorfer, ed., Chinese Women in the Imperial Past: New Perspectives (Brill: Leiden, 1999).
3. ‘Nature’ is capitalized when it is considered as a cosmic entity in its own right.
4. For example, those mapped and discussed in M. Elvin, The Pattern of the Chinese Past
(Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif., 1973), 310–11, and in H. Dunstan, “The Late
Ming epidemics: A preliminary survey,” Ch’ing-shih wen-t’i 3.3 (1975).
5. See for example the chapters on cholera by K. M. MacPherson and by Zhang and Elvin
on tuberculosis in M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments of Time: Environment and
Society in Chinese History (Cambridge University Press: New York, 1998). C. Benedict,
Bubonic Plague in Nineteenth-Century China (Stanford University Press: Stanford,
Calif., 1996) is also an important study, with a strong environmental component,
though the identiﬁcation of the disease-entities in the epidemics discussed may in
some cases need further testing.
6. For example, R. Grove, V. Damodaran, and S. Sangwan, eds., Nature and the Orient:
The Environmental History of South and Southeast Asia (Oxford University Press: New
Delhi, 1998).

Notes to pages xxi–xxviii

473

7. On the West, see Nicolas Giudici, La Philosophie du Mont Blanc: De l’alpinisme à
l’économie immatérielle (Grasset: Paris, 2000). There is comparison with China on
276–80. On China more broadly see Xie Qiyi, “Wudai ci-zhong-de ‘shan’ yixiang
yanjiu” [The conceptional representation of the ‘mountain’ in the lyric songs of the
Five Dynasties] (Master’s thesis, National Taiwan Normal University, 2000), whose
range is much wider than its title suggests. I am grateful to Professor Liu Ts’ui-jung for
a copy of this work.
8. Quoted in Xie Qiyi, “Conceptional representation of the ‘mountain’,” 68. Lines have
been omitted between the ﬁrst quatrain and what follows.
9. Chou Zhao'ao, ed. Du Shaoling ji xiangzhu [Du Fu’s collected works with detailed
notes] (4 vols., Wenxue guji kanxingshe: Beijing, 1955), I:2:2–3.
10. Chinese zaohua.
11. Giudici, La Philosophie du Mont Blanc, 189–91.
12. Giudici, La Philosophie du Mont Blanc, 249.
13. C. J. Glacken, Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought from
Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century (University of California Press:
Berkeley, Calif., 1967).
14. Shangdi (of which there are many translations, including ‘Lord Above’), and Tian,
‘Heaven’, which could have anthropic qualities including moral judgment and
communication. On hypatotheism see M. Elvin, “Was there a transcendental breakthrough in China?” in S. N. Eisenstadt, ed., The Axial Age and its Diversity (State
University of New York: Albany, N.Y., 1986).
15. The zaohua mentioned above. See also note 10.
16. Lı̌ .
17. The xiàng expressed as the sixty-four hexagrams (guà) of the Book of Changes.
18. ‘Premodern’ can be deﬁned as that existing prior to the routine incorporation of
science into productive and destructive technologies.
19. See M. Elvin, D. Crook, Shen Ji, R. Jones, and J. Dearing, “The impact of clearance and
irrigation on the environment in the Lake Erhai catchment from the ninth to the nineteenth century,” East Asian History 23 (June 2002).
20. M. Elvin, Changing Stories in the Chinese World (Stanford University Press: Stanford,
Calif., 1997).
21. M. Elvin and N. Su, “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic factors in the
changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay, circa 1000–1800,” Environment and History 1.1
(Feb. 1995). Note: post-vocalic ‘r’ in ‘Harng’ shows a rising tone in tonalized pinyin.
22. Elvin, “Blood and statistics.”
23. A. Leopold, A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There (Oxford University
Press: New York, 1949), vii.
24. P. Bak, How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality (Oxford University
Press: Oxford, 1997).
25. The word ‘logistic’ comes from a type of mathematical curve. Where N(t) is
the number of units after a time t, and the other letters stand for constants, it has the
formula N(t) = a / [1 + b exp(-ct)] where ‘exp’ is the exponential function. Its shape is
close to that of an inclined ‘∫’.
26. QSD: Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy]. (Originally
Guochao shi duo, 1869, reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), 155.
27. Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao [Researches on measures of length,
capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing,
1992).

474

Notes to pages 3–12

1 Landmarks and Time-marks
1. C. Blunden and M. Elvin, A Cultural Atlas of China, rev. edn (Facts on File: New York,
1998).
2. The term ‘Han’ is hard to deﬁne rigorously. The general sense is that of a ‘mainstream’
Chinese as characterized by the combination of a perceived ethnicity, the use of the
Chinese language, certain key aspects of culture such as the avoidance of the levirate
and cross-generation marriage, and acceptance by others as being Chinese. This identity was gradually constructed through the course of time. See Nicola Di Cosmo,
Ancient China and Its Enemies: The Rise of Nomadic Power in East Asian History
(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 2002), esp. ‘Introduction’.
3. ce stands for ‘common era’, that is ad. It corresponds to the Chinese term gongyuan
or ‘common origin’, and is useful as a nondenominational indicator. bce likewise is
‘before the common era’.
4. bp means ‘before present’. The ‘present’ is commonly taken as being 1950 ce. bp will
only be used here, however, where broad approximations are used.
5. J.-Q. Fang and G. Liu, “Relationship between climatic change and the nomadic southward migrations in East Asia during historical times,” Climatic Change 22 (1992).
6. I deﬁne the ‘modern era’ as having begun in China around 1850, a deliberately round
ﬁgure. The criterion is simply that after this time the inﬂuence of the West was an
essential component in determining the broad course of events within China. The
term ‘early modern’ as usually applied to Europe refers to a considerably earlier period,
and raises conceptual difﬁculties. ‘Early modern’ in China can, however, be taken
simply to mean between 1850 and the First World War.
7. For descriptions of the sale of children both during famines, and to ease the pressures
on the budget of poverty-stricken families, see the poems in Zhang Yingchang, ed.,
Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] hereafter QSD, (originally Guochao shi duo, 1869,
reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), 564–74.
8. QSD, 444.

2 Humans v. Elephants: The Three Thousand Years War
1. Wen Huanran et al., Zhongguo lishi shiqi zhiwu yu dongwu bianqian yanjiu [Studies on
changes in plants and animals in China during historical times] (Chongqing
chubanshe: Chongqing, 1995). See also H. T. Chang, “On the question of the existence
of elephants and the rhinoceros in northern China in historical times,” Bulletin of the
Geological Society of China 5 (1926).
2. For a picture of one of the ﬁnds of tusks at Sanxingdui, in the Shu kingdom that
existed in part of Sichuan contemporaneously with the later Shang, see Liu Yang and
E. Capon, Masks of Mystery: Ancient Chinese Bronzes from Sanxingdui (Art Gallery of
New South Wales: Sydney, 2000), 47, also 23–4.
3. The stomach shells of turtles or shoulder blades of oxen on which the replies to oracular inquiries were recorded in Shang times.
4. Fan Chuo, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 196.
5. J. Legge, The Works of Mencius, vol. 2 in The Chinese Classics, with a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes (7 vols., Trübner: London,
1861), III.2.ix (156–7). Translation slightly altered, and emphasis added.
6. Qì, ‘aethers’, also has the senses of ‘matter’, ‘energy’, and ‘vitality’. Yang, ‘bright–positive’,
has the further implications of warmth, masculinity, taking the initiative, and so on.

Notes to pages 12–17

475

7. HNZ: Huainanzi [The book of the Prince of Huainan] (2nd century bce; reprinted,
Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng bianyin jijinhui: Taibei, 1978), ‘Zhuixing xun’, 143–4.
Cp. ibid., 137.
8. Song Queming, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 192.
9. Ye Tinggui, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 191.
10. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 191.
11. Li Wenfeng, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 195.
12. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 188.
13. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 192.
14. Liu Ts’ui-jung, “Zhongguo lishi-shang guanyu shanlinchuanze-de guannian he zhidu”
[The concepts and institutional forms relating to mountains, forests, rivers, and
marshes in Chinese history], in Cao Tianwang, Lai Jingchang, and Yang Jiancheng,
eds., Zhongyang yanjiuyuan Zhongshan renwen shehui kexue yanjiusuo juanshu 46
(Academia Sinica: Taibei, 1999), 14. The phrase used, namely “[if] the common people
can obtain their teeth,” tends to suggest that this was intermittent, not a regular
pursuit.
15. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 192.
16. Song Zhenhao, Xia-Shang shehui shenghuo shi [Social life under the Xia and Shang]
(Zhongguo shehui kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1994), 244–6; Xu Jinxiong, Zhongguo
gudai shehui [Ancient Chinese society] (Taiwan shangwu yinshuguan: Taibei, 1988), 42.
17. S. Couvreur, Tch’ouen Ts’iou et Tso Tchouan: La Chronique de la principauté de Lou
(1914; reprinted, 3 vols., Cathasia: Paris, 1951), bilingual text, I:346.
18. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:512.
19. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, II:411.
20. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 189.
21. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 193.
22. Liu Xun, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 191 and 193.
23. M. Elvin, The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif.,
1973), 93.
24. In the translations of premodern Chinese texts in this book the word ‘month’ (or
‘moon’) always indicates the Chinese lunar calendar month. In 1388, the ‘third month’
indicates the period from 7 April to 6 May in the Western Julian calendar, but the
pattern of correspondences with the Julian, and after 1582 the Gregorian, calendar
varied from year to year.
25. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 198.
26. WZZ: Xie Zhaozhe, Wu zazu [Fivefold miscellany] (1608; reprinted under the supervision of Li Weizhen, Xinxing shuju: Taibei, 1971), 706–8.
27. The Qing made ceremonial use of elephants. See H. S. Brunnert and V. V. Hagelstrom,
Present Day Political Organization of China, translated A. Beltchenko and E. E. Moran
(Kelly and Walsh: Shanghai, 1912; reprinted, Taibei, 1960), 37–8. They were obtained as
tribute from countries like Burma, where they had been given personal names, which
they seem to have kept in China. Yunnan and Guizhou provinces sent tusks as tribute.
See Wu Zhenyu, Yangjizhai conglu [Collected records from the Yangjizhai Studio]
(printed from the nineteenth-century MS by the Zhejiang guji chubanshe: Hangzhou,
1985), 291 and 268. I am grateful to Professor Mark Elliott-Smith for providing this
reference.
28. Evidence of a general sort for this intuitive feeling may be found in S. R. Kellert and E.
O. Wilson, eds., The Biophilia Hypothesis (Island Press: Washington D.C., 1993), S. R.
Kellert, “The Biophilia hypothesis: Aristotelian echoes of the ‘Good Life’,” in Itō Suntarō
and Yoshida Yoshinori, eds., Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental Crisis

476

Notes to pages 17–22

(International Research Center for Japanese Studies: Kyoto, 1995), and S. R. Kellert,
Kinship to Mastery: Biophilia in Human Evolution and Development (Island
Press/Shearwater Books: Washington D.C., 1997).
29. Dali-zhou wenlian [Literary Association of Dali], Dali gu yishu chao [Transcriptions of
ancient lost books from Dali] (Yunnan Renmin chubanshe: Kunming, 2001), 68–71,
and also 18, 128, 144, and 167. On the use of ﬁre to drive out rhinoceroses, tigers, and
leopards see 270.

3 The Great Deforestation: An Overview
1. Liu Zongyuan, Liu Zongyuan ji [Collected works of Liu Zongyuan] (Tang: Zhonghua
shuju: Taibei, 1978), 43:1240–1, “Xing nan lu.”
2. Chen Qiaoyi, “Gudai Shaoxing diqu tianran senlin-de pohuai ji qi dui nongye-de
yingxiang” [The destruction in ancient times of the natural forests of Shaoxing and its
impact on agriculture], Dili xuebao 31.2 (June 1965), 130.
3. S. D. Richardson, Forests and Forestry in China (Island Press: Washington D.C., 1990),
115.
4. He Baochuan, China on the Edge: The Crisis of Ecology and Development (China Books:
San Francisco, Calif., 1991), 29.
5. Wang Shuizhao, ed., Su Shi xuanji [An anthology from Su Shi (Dongpo)] (Shanghai
guji chubanshe: Shanghai, 1984), 118. The location of Peng, the place referred to in the
poem, was about 34° N and 117° E. Note that I read feng = ‘wind’ as fen = ‘divide’.
6. N. K. Menzies, Forestry, vol. VI.3 of J. Needham, ed., Science and Civilisation in China
(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1996).
7. N. K. Menzies, “The villagers’ view of environmental history in Yunnan province,” in
M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments of Time: Environment and Society in Chinese
History (Cambridge University Press: New York, 1998).
8. At 35° 10´ N and 113° 5´ E.
9. Cited in Wen Huanran et al., Zhongguo lishi shiqi zhiwu yu dongwu bianqian yanjiu
[Studies on changes in plants and animals in China during historical times]
(Chongqing chubanshe: Chongqing, 1995), 120.
10. I use ‘county’ for the Chinese xian, the lowest level of formal bureaucratic government
under the later empire, and ‘district’ for xiang, which was often the next level down.
‘Canton’ is the Chinese li.
11. Deng Gang [Kent], Development versus Stagnation: Technological Continuity and Agricultural Progess in Pre-Modern China (Greenwood: Westport, Conn., 1993), xxv.
12. Cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 119. Pages 117–22 give the background.
13. R. H. Waring and S. W. Running, Forest Ecosystems: Analysis at Multiple Scales, 2nd edn
(Academic Press: San Diego, Calif., 1998), 217–18.
14. Mei Zengliang [Boyan], Bojian shanfang wenji [Collected works from the Bojian
Studio], in Zhonghua wenshi congshu no. 12 (Qing; reprinted, Jinghua shuju: Taibei,
1968), ‘Ji pengmin shi’ [A record of matters relating to the shed people]. Also cited in
Chen Rong, Zhongguo senlin shiliao [Historical materials on China’s forests] (Xinhua:
Beijing, 1983), 52, and discussed in A. Osborne, “Barren mountains, raging rivers: The
ecological and social effects of changing land-use on the Lower Yangzi periphery in lateimperial China,” (Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, 1989), 18–19.
15. That is, theories about the effects on human beings of occult forces running through
the earth.

Notes to pages 22–6

477

16. The location of a grave was thought to affect the fortunes of the buried person’s
descendants.
17. Between 1957 and 1980 present-day Xuanzhou (Qing-dynasty Xuancheng) had a mean
annual rainfall of 1289 mm. The minimum was 777 mm, the maximum 1328 mm. See
ZGZRZYCS: Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu [Series on the natural resources of China]
(42 vols., Zhongguo huanjiing kexu chubanshe: Beijing, 1995), 23:249 (Anhui). About
seventy per cent of this fell during the six months from April through September.
Xuancheng is thus likely to have abundant rainfall in most years. Removing trees
would most probably have slightly increased total annual local runoff, as trees absorb
and then transpire water, that is, ‘breathe’ it out into the atmosphere. Waring and
Running, Forest Ecosystems, 110, note that the “return of nutrients in litterfall” is the
“major route of recycling from vegetation to soil.”
18. R. B. Marks, Tigers, Rice, Silk, and Silt (Cambridge University Press: New York, 1998),
66–70, 76–9, and also 35–7, 319–22, and 327–30.
19. Xu Hailiang, “Huanghe xiayou-de duiji lishi fazhan qushi” [The history and trend of
development of the sedimentary deposits in the lower reaches of the Yellow River],”
Zhongguo shuili xuebao 7 (1990); and Ye Qingchao, “Shilun Subei fei-Huanghe
sanjiaozhou-de fayu” [On the development of the abandoned Yellow River delta], Dili
xuebao 41.2 (June 1986).
20. M. Elvin and Su Ninghu, ‘Action at a distance: The inﬂuence of the Yellow River on
Hangzhou Bay since ad 1000’, in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
21. A summary of Japanese and Chinese studies on the growth of the Yangzi delta region
may be found in M. Elvin and N. Su, “Engineering the sea: Hydraulic systems and
premodern technological lock-in in the Harngzhou Bay area circa 1000–1800,” in Itō
Suntarō and Yoshida Yoshinori, eds., Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental Crisis (International Research Center for Japanese Studies: Kyoto 1995).
22. Fujita Katsuhisa,“Kandai no Kōka shisui kikō” [Flood control measures on the Yellow
River], Chūgoku sui rishi kenkyū 16 (1986), 14.
23. Elvin and Su, “Action at a distance,” 364–5.
24. Zhongguo Kexue-yuan Zhongguo ziran dili bianji Weiguanhui, ed., Zhongguo ziran dili:
Lishi ziran dili [The natural geography of China: Historical natural geography] (Kexue
chubanshe: Beijing, 1982), hereafter ZZD, 33.
25. Fujita Katsuhisa, “Flood control measures on the Yellow River,” 12–13.
26. Cited in Fujita Katsuhisa, “Flood control measures on the Yellow River,” 13–14.
27. Calculated from Fujita Katsuhisa, “Flood control measures on the Yellow River,” table
facing p. 10. I have omitted the ﬂoods of 107 ce as they were due to rains.
28. Fujita Katsuhisa, “Flood control measures on the Yellow River,” 7 and 11.
29. Yuan Qinglin, Zhongguo huanjing baohu shihua [Historical discussions on the conservation of nature in China (Zhongguo huanjing kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1990), 72,
gives the lower ﬁgure of one breach in every 125 years between 69 ce and the Sui
dynasty at the end of the sixth century ce.
30. In the southern Northwest, modern Xi'an.
31. ZZD, 33, and Yuan Qinglin, Conservation of Nature in China, 30 and 90–1.
32. Li Yuanliang’s restoration of Liangyuan. Yuan Qinglin, Conservation of Nature in
China, 91.
33. A li was roughly half a kilometer in length, but the hu was a variable measure of capacity
that had two ranges of values in late-imperial times. Surviving vessels either containing
28 to 29 liters or from 50 to 56 liters (Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao
[Researches on measures of length, capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese

478

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

Notes to pages 26–8
dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1992), 277). A hu surviving from the Wei of the
Three Dynasties (third century ce) has a capacity of somewhat over 20 liters (Qiu
Guangming, Measures, 254–5). It is not possible to be conﬁdent about the present
values of this premodern capacity measure.
Yuan Qinglin, Conservation of Nature in China, 72.
Calculated from data in Itō Hashiko, “Sōdai no Kōka shisui kikō” [The structure of
ﬂood control on the Yellow River under the Song dynasty], Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 16
(1986), tables following p. 16.
Tuotuo, et al., (eds.), Yuan, Songshi [History of the Song] (Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1977).
Summarized in Elvin and Su, “Action at a distance,” 393–406.
Loess is rock in powder form, usually laid down by the wind. The top layer can develop
into a fertile so-called ‘loessial soil’.
Matsuda Yoshirō, “Shindai no Kōka shisui kikō” [The structure of ﬂood control on the
Yellow River under the Qing dynasty], Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 16 (1986), 34–40.
J. Jeník, Pictorial Encyclopedia of Forests (Hamlyn: London, 1979), 152, 154, 156–7, 169,
and 210.
Manchu and Mongol names of persons are, by convention, written as single words to
distinguish them from those of Han Chinese.
Cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 48.
At about 39° N and 100° E, being the upper reaches of the historic Ruo. The system is
one of inland drainage.
Waring and Running, Forest Ecosystems, 46, and 49–50, note that if warm, moist, turbulent air condenses on the snow surface, it adds heat to it, and this can lead to melting.
Pines are more effective in delaying snowmelt than deciduous trees. An important variable is the density of the stand, or, approximately equivalently, the area covered by
foliage. See also Jeník, Forests, 148 for a picture of snowmelt in a forest and the point
that the temperature of the trunks is a critical variable.
By Tao Baolian, cited in Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 48.
At present the annual precipitation in Ganzhou is about 150 mm, and the total annual
hours of sunshine about 3,000. See ZGZRZYCS, 38: maps facing 268 and 274 (Gansu).
The two-phase snowmelt awaits explanation.
Tulishen, Yiyu lu [An account of unfamiliar lands] in Imanishi Shunjū, ed., Jiaozhu
yiyu lu (Tenri: n.p., 1964), 146, 201, and 349.
At about 105° E.
When reﬂecting the light?
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 29.
The general need for such caution emerges clearly from A. Grove and O. Rackham, The
Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History (Yale University Press: New
Haven, Conn., 2001), albeit in another context.
They can inhibit storms, for example. See Waring and Running, Forest Ecosystems, 275.
They also reduce the intensity of the light reaching the ground, the percentage
depending on the dominant species. See Jeník, Forests, 155, 159–60.
In boreal regions, forest cover can increase the temperature, while the reverse is true in
temperate climates. See Waring and Running, Forest Ecosystems, 304–6.
For a general outline of the issues, see R. G. Barry and R. J. Chorley, Atmosphere, Weather
and Climate, 5th edn (Methuen: London, 1987), 338–48. H. H. Lamb, Climate, History and
the Modern World (Routledge: London, 1995), 329, stresses the probable distinctive nature
of the low-latitude zones. There is also a useful summary in M. Mann,“Ecological change

Notes to pages 28–34

55.
56.
57.

58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

479

in North India: Deforestation and agrarian distress in the Ganga–Yamuna Doab
1800–1850,” in R. Grove, V. Damodaran, and S. Sangwan, eds., Nature and the Orient: The
Environmental History of South and Southeast Asia (Oxford University Press: New Delhi,
1998), esp. 400–2.
Or ‘Hepu’.
At roughly 22° N and 109° E.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 81. The square-pallet chain-pump mentioned here
was colloquially known as the ‘dragon’s backbone pump’, as the circulating wooden
chain of linked square pallets that hauled the water up a sloping trough looked like a
line of huge vertebrae.
Early nineteenth-century gazetteer for Lianzhou quoted in Wen Huanran, Plants and
Animals, 81.
The qi, that is the matter–energy–vitality.
Yin and yang.
Vietnam.
Liu Ts’ui-jung, “Han migration and the settlement of Taiwan: The onset of envrionmental change,” in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time, 197.
M. Berenbaum, Bugs in the System: Insects and their Impact on Human Affairs (AddisonWesley: Reading, Mass., 1994), 230–7.
H. Morin, Entretiens sur le paludisme et sa prévention en Indochine (Imprimerie
d’Extrême-Orient: Hanoi, 1935) lists the various species of Anopheles. Cited in Hardy,
“Migration in 20th century Vietnam,” see the following note.
I owe this suggestion to Dr Andrew Hardy, author of a remarkable Ph.D. thesis for the
Australian National University, “A history of migration to upland areas in 20th century
Vietnam.” See Intro.5, iii.19, iv.6–9. Chapter 9 quotes an informant as saying of his
home area that “there was a period when malaria was rife, the time when the forest was
still thick” (and pp. 263‒8 generally).
Hardy, “Migration in 20th century Vietnam,” chapter 9 footnote 11, quotes an
informant as saying of one area that “only people just arrived got it.”
Jeník, Forests, ‘The animals of the forest’, 367–425.
YL: Yueling [Ordinances for the months] (pre-Qin), in Chen Hao, ed., Liji jishuo [The
Record of the Rites] (Shijie shuju: Taibei, 1969), passim.
Li Ge scolding Duke Xuan who ruled the state of Lu (Northeast) from 607 to 589 bce.
GY: Guoyu [The tales of the various states] (pre-Qin; Shanghai guji chubanshe:
Shanghai, 1978), 178–80.
Xu Jinxiong, Zhongguo gudai shehui [Ancient Chinese society] (Taiwan shangwu
yinshuguan: Taibei, 1988), 40–1.
Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 45.
Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 42–4.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 226.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 220–8.
In the Northwest, north of the loop of the Yellow River.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 25.
Liu Ts’ui-jung, “The Settlement of Taiwan,” 172–3.
Wu Zhen. Not to be confused with the Yuan-dynasty painter of the same name.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 175.
Li Xinheng.
At about 102° E, west of Chengdu. Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 178.
Ji Han, Nanfang caomu zhuang [The forms of the plants and trees of the South],

480

84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.

Notes to pages 34–42
translated Hui-lin Li, A Fourth Century Flora of Southeast Asia (Chinese University
Press: Hong Kong, 1979), 131–2, 146.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 177, 179, 181.
Lu Zuofan.
Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 168.
In modern Liuzhou.
Modern Guiping.
On Lianzhou (Far South) see Wen Huanran, Plants and Animals, 81.
Present-day Enshi in Hubei at 30° 20´ N and 109° 30´ E on the western edge of the
Center. The town was Nanjiao.
Chen Rong, China’s Forests, 52–3.
By Shao Changheng, who was born in nearby Wujin. In Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing
shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] (originally Guochao shi duo, 1869; reprinted, Xinhua
shudian: Beijing, 1960), hereafter QSD, 444.
By Qian Yikai. QSD 7–8.
QSD, 446.
QSD, 562. The poem is by Zhu Shou.
Wu Nongxiang. In QSD, 246.
Respectively, (south) Zhejiang (Southeast), southwest Shanxi (Northwest), and
Shaanxi and Gansu (Northwest).
QSD, 928.
QSD, 932–3.
They run from about 110° E to about 108° E. Taibai is at about 107° 30´ E.
There is a description of some of the technology used in E. Vermeer, “Population and
ecology along the frontier in Qing China,” in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time,
250. Pictures of modern forestry cableways may be found in Jeník, Forests, 436 and 456.
For a picture of a western Eurasian Castanea, to gain an approximate idea of the Castanea
mentioned in the second verse, see Jeník, Forests, 53 (Castanea sativa, Spanish chestnut).

4 The Great Deforestation: Regions and Species
1. Wang Chi-wu, The Forests of China, with a Survey of Grassland and Desert Vegetation
(Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1961), 10–11; Hou Xueyu, Zhongguo ziran
dili [The natural geography of China], vol. 2, Zhiwu dili [Vegetation geography]
(Kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1988), enclosed color map and 112–13; N. K. Menzies,
Forestry, vol. VI.3 of J. Needham, ed., Science and Civilisation in China (Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, 1996), 550–4; Ueda Makoto, Mori to midori no Chūgokushi: Ekorojikaru-hisutorii no kokoromi [Chinese history in terms of its forests and vegetation: A tentative essay in ecological history] (Iwanami shoten: Tokyo, 1999).
2. Pictures of comparable European larches can be found in J. Jeník, Pictorial Encyclopedia of Forests (Hamlyn: London, 1979), 21 and 167.
3. Pictures of the ﬁrst two of these may be found in Jeník, Forests, 12 (holm oak), 249, 341,
274, 286 (oaks); 24, 26–7, 63, 65, 105, 128, 131, 132, 179, 181, 194, 290 (pines). The range of
the Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris), shown on 34, goes from the north of Scotland to
northern Manchuria.
4. Cihai [Sea of Phrases] (Zhonghua shuju: Shanghai, 1947), hereafter CH, 791.
5. B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription and Translation (Museum of
Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950), #241. Alternative readings of the second half

Notes to pages 42–6

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.

481

of the second line of the last verse would be ‘and the thorns with white ﬂowers’, or just
‘oaks’. The interpretation adopted is a guess that depends on S. Couvreur, Dictionnaire
classique de la langue chinoise (Imprimerie de la Mission Catholique: Hejian fu, 1911),
459: ‘yeuse’ for the yu in zuo yu, and the sense of the context: the song is describing
massive trees, not shrubs. This, and other translations, are mine.
Karlgren, Odes, #245.
Karlgren, Odes, #290.
Karlgren, Odes, #237. The Gunyi referred to here are usually identiﬁed as the ‘dog
barbarians’ who lived in what is now the western part of Shaanxi province. Furthermore, like the anthem at the opening of this section, the text only says zuo yu, usually
rendered just ‘oaks’, as by the great Swedish sinologist Karlgren. My reading of yu as
‘evergreen oaks’ is, again, a guess. Its only bases are, as before, Couvreur’s dictionary,
and an instinct that the terse style of the Songs, and their authors’ distaste for mere
reduplication, make simple redundancy unlikely. Menzies, Forestry, 601, regards yu as
a synonym for zuo, and takes zuo as Quercus mongolica, or else, by inference, Q. acutissima, both deciduous. However this may be, the climate was warmer in the second
millennium bce, so the presence so far north of evergreen oaks or acorn-bearing oaklike trees, such as Lithocarpus, would not have been impossible at this time.
S. Couvreur,Tch’ouen Ts’iou et Tso Tchouan: La Chronique de la principauté de Lou,
(1914; reprinted, 3 vols., Cathasia: Paris, 1951), bilingual text, I:292.
Zhang Juncheng, “Shang-Yin lin kao” [A study of forests under the Shang-Yin
dynasty], Nongye kaogu 1 (1985), 182.
J. Legge, The Works of Mencius, vol. 2 in The Chinese Classics with a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes (Trübner: London, 1861),
III:1.iv.7, 126. Shun is traditionally said to have become emperor in 2255 bce.
Examples in Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, e.g., I:18, 27, 36, 47, 66, 85, 115, 138, 140, 153, 322, etc.
H. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China: Zum Subjekt-Objekt-Gegensatz in der klassischen chinesischen Philosophie (Lang: Frankfurt am Main, 1984), 81.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, I:630.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, II:13.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, II:392.
E.g., Karlgren, Odes, ##163, 180, and 237.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, I:143–4.
It is near modern Fei county. See Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:355–6.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:56.
Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:323.
Zhouli zhushu [The Rituals of Zhou], in Ruan Yuan, ed., Shisan jing zhushu [The thirteen classics with notes and explanations] (Qing; reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing,
1980), hereafter ZL, 747. The duties of the shanyu listed here are mostly ensuring that
trees are not cut at a time of year not allowed by the imperial laws. I am grateful to
Ulrike Mittendorf of the University of Heidelberg for drawing this passage to my
attention.
LJ: Liji [Records of ritual behavior] (later Han), in vol. 4 of Shisan jing zhushu [The
thirteen scriptures] (reprinted, 7 vols., Chūbun shuppansha: Tokyo, 1971), “Yue ling,”
2935. First month.
I take the words shanlin in his job description as ‘mountain forests’ rather than ‘mountains and forests’ because, as indicated in note 4.22, his duties predominantly related to
controlling the felling of trees at the permitted times.
ZL, 747.

482

Notes to pages 46–55

26. Song Zhenhao, Xia-Shang shehui shenghuo Shi [Social life under the Xia and Shang]
(Zhongguo shehui kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1994), ch. 8.
27. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:33.
28. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, I:576.
29. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, I:55.
30. Karlgren, Odes, #300.
31. Karlgren, Odes, #238.
32. Karlgren, Odes, #229.
33. Karlgren, Odes, ##172 and 176.
34. For example, Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, I:478.
35. Karlgren, Odes, #192.
36. Karlgren, Odes, #204.
37. For example, Karlgren, Odes, ## 60, 76, 100 and 109.
38. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:123.
39. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, III:673. Note also I:426, though the species is not given.
40. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, II:54–6.
41. Possibly dropsy, beriberi, or a related condition.
42. This sketch is based on Hou Xueyu, Vegetation Geography, and J. Thorp, ‘Soils’, in J. L.
Buck, ed., Land Utilization in China (1937; reprinted, Paragon: New York, 1964).
43. ‘Neutral’ is deﬁned as a pH of 7.3 to 6.4 and ‘acid’ from 6.4 to 4.0.
44. Catalpa ovata.
45. Couvreur, Tso Tchouan, II:462–3.
46. For examples, see D. Hawkes, Ch’u Tz’u: The Songs of the South (Clarendon Press:
Oxford, 1959), 43 and 64.
47. There is a not very wonderful translation into German by E. Von Zach, Die chinesische
Anthologie: Übersetzungen aus dem Wen hsüan (Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
Mass., 1958), 103–7. The Chinese texts I have used are from SJ: Shiji [Records of the
Grand Historian] (Han; reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1959), “Sima Xiangru
zhuan” [Biography of Sima Xiangru], 57:3002–4, and Wenxuan [The Chinese
anthology] (6th century ce, 1181 edn; reprinted, 4 cases, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing,
1974), hereafter WX, 7:17a–24b.
48. Xin yu [New discourses] xia, “Zizhi.” Cited from Sugimoto Kenji, “Chūgoku kodai no
mokuzai ni tsuite” [Timber in ancient China], Tōhō gakuhō (Mar. 1974), 83–4.
49. Both in the Northwest.
50. Sugimoto Kenji, “Timber in ancient China,” 86–7; Wang Chi-wu, Forests of China, 31,
32, and 65; and CH, entry on bianbo (Chamaecyparis obtusa).
51. Wang Fu in his Qianfu lun [Discourses of the Hidden Master], Fuchi pian, cited in
Sugimoto Kenji, “Timber in ancient China,” 96 and 118.
52. Liu Ts’ui-jung, “Zhongguo lishi-shang guanyu shanlinchuanze-de guannian he zhidu”
[The concepts and institutional forms relating to mountains, forests, rivers, and
marshes in Chinese history], in Cao Tianwang, Lai Jingchang, and Yang Jiancheng,
eds., Zhongyang yanjiuyuan Zhongshan renwen shehui kexue yanjiusuo juanshu 46
(Academia Sinica: Taibei, 1999), 12. The original is in Fan Ye, Hou Han shu [History of
the Later Han] (Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1965), 1278. By the time this work
was compiled in the ﬁfth century, Buddhism had become solidly established in China,
and it is legitimate at least to wonder if this may have helped to motivate the selection
and ‘angling’ of this anecdote, notwithstanding the impeccably Confucian vocabulary.
53. Shen Yue, Song shu [The history of the Song] (Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing,
1974), 54:1536–7 (‘Kong Jigong’). Note that this is not the famous Song dynasty at the

Notes to pages 55–64

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.

74.
75.
76.

483

turn of the ﬁrst and second millennia ce, but an earlier and relatively short-lived
southern dynasty (420–478).
Nakahara Teruo, “Shindai sōsen ni yoru shōhin ryūtsū ni tsuite” [The ﬂow of
commodities on grain-transport ships during the Qing dynasty], Shigaku kenkyū 72
(1959), 69.
See the map of the Grand Canal in C. Blunden and M. Elvin, Cultural Atlas of China,
rev. edn (Facts on File: New York, 1998), 104–5.
At 26° 10´ N, 109° 45´ E.
Yuan Qinglin, Zhongguo huanjing baohu shihua [Historical discussions on the conservation of nature in China (Zhongguo huanjing kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1990), 267.
For these questions see N. Menzies, “Trees, ﬁelds, and people: The forests of China
from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries” (Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley, Calif., 1991), 67–85.
See Blunden and Elvin, Cultural Atlas of China, 123, map on ‘Tripartite divisions: the
Three Kingdoms period and Northern Song marketing regions’.
Data on present-day Sichuan is taken from Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu [Series on
the natural resources of China] (42 vols., Zhongguo huanjing kexue chubanshe:
Beijing, 1995), hereafter ZGZRZYCS, 33 (Sichuan).
Lin Hongrong, “Sichuan gudai senlin-de bianqian” [Changes in the ancient forests of
Sichuan], Nongye kaogu 9.1 (1985), 162–7, and “Lishi shiqi Sichuan senlin-de bianqian”
[Changes in the forests of Sichuan during the historical period], Nongye kaogu 10.2
(1985), 215–40. Information in the present section about Sichuan’s forests in historical
times is drawn from these two linked articles, unless noted otherwise.
Lin Hongrong, “Historical forests of Sichuan,” 218–19.
Lin Hongrong, “Ancient forests of Sichuan,” 63.
See the photograph of the decorated brick picture of this in Menzies, Forestry, 642.
Reading cuo ‘trim’ for zuo ‘sit’.
Cited in Lin Hongrong, “Ancient forests of Sichuan,” 168. Emphasis added.
I have used WX, 4:13b–27a, and also Qu Tuiyan, Han Wei Liuchao fu xuan [Selected
rhapsodies from the Han, Wei, and Six Dynasties period] (1964; reprinted, Shanghai
Guji chubanshe: Shanghai, 1979), for its notes. The translation is tentative in places, but
there are grounds, if not always decisive ones, for the readings adopted.
Qu Tuiyuan, Rhapsodies, 140–1.
Qu Tuiyuan, Rhapsodies, 140–1.
Named for Robert Fortune, a nineteenth-century agricultural and botanical spy
who secured the tea plants from China on which the Indian tea industry was later based.
Lin Hongrong, “Ancient forests of Sichuan,” 162.
CH, 673.
The star-zone Bi was one of the twenty-eight divisions of the night sky according to
the Chinese astronomical system. (It contained the ﬁrst-magnitude star Aldebaran.)
Archaic superstition thought that when the moon was in this zone, there would be
heavy rain. But note that, even if the meteorology was mythical, the engineering was
real. See Karlgren, Odes, #232.
Strictly, the ‘grapefruits’ should be ‘pomelos’.
Ji Han, Nanfang caomu zhuang [The forms of the plants and trees of the South],
translated Hui-lin Li, A Fourth Century Flora of Southeast Asia (Chinese University
Press: Hong Kong, 1979), 90–2.
Song Qi, quoted by Lin Hongrong, “Historical forests of Sichuan,” 217. Song was an
ofﬁcial and historian who lived in the Northern Song period.

484

Notes to pages 64–71

77. Chou Zhao'ao, ed., Du Shaoling ji xiangzhu [Du Fu’s collected works with detailed
notes] (4 vols., Wenxue guji kanxingshe: Beijing, 1955), II.iv.9 and 107, “Ping He Shiyi
shaofu Yong mi qimu.” I have put the translation in the past tense since in the next
poem quoted here it seems that they have already grown, and both poems were probably written at about the same time.
78. Chou Zhao'ao, Works of Du Fu, II.iv.9 and 108.
79. Su Dongpo, Su Dongpo quanji [Complete works of Su Dongpo] (13 vols., Hanguo
wenhua kanhanghui: Seoul, 1983), II:137, “Tengxian-shi tongnian xiyuan.”
80. Lin Hongrong, “Historical forests of Sichuan,” 218.
81. Su Dongpo, Complete Works, II:199.
82. ‘Contrary’ here is pronounced to rhyme with ‘Mary’.
83. Su Dongpo, Complete Works, II:199–200.
84. Guo Zhengzhong, Songdai yanye jingji shi [An economic history of the salt industry
during the Song dynasty] (Renmin chubanshe: Beijing, 1990), 57. ‘Jiang’ is approximately present-day Chongqing.
85. Just possibly the sense is ‘drawing it off ’ down piping.
86. Referred to by Guo Zhengzhong, Economic History of the Salt Industry, 62. Full text in
Su Dongpo, Dongpo Zhilin [Su Dongpo’s miscellany] (1097–1101; reprinted, Zhonghua
shuju: Beijing, 1981), 76–7.
87. Illustrated in J. Needham and Wang Ling, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4.II,
Mechanical Engineering (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1965), 371. This
passage is discussed on 142–3, not altogether convincingly in that it is suggested that
what was involved here was a ‘piston-bellows’ rather than what I have called a ‘ﬂapbellows’, as shown on 371.
88. Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao [Researches on measures of length,
capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing,
1992), 162–3.
89. Sung Ying-hsing, T’ien-kung k’ai-wu: Chinese Technology in the Seventeenth Century,
translated E-tu Zen Sun and Shiou-chuan Sun (Pennsylvania State University Press:
University Park, Penn., 1966), 116–23.
90. Li Yuan, Shu shuijing [The classic of the waterways of Sichuan] (1794; reprinted, 2 vols.,
Ba-Shu shushe: Chengdu, 1985) I:4:15a–16a. I am most grateful to Dr Warren Wan-kuo
Sun for the gift of this book.
91. The translated place-names in this passage are, in order of occurrence, Shizi Qiao,
Siwang Qi, Daning, Xianshui, Zidong, Yun'an, Wentang, Jianwei, Fushun, and Chuanbei.
92. Sung Ying-hsing, T’ien-kung k’ai-wu, 120, shows the animals rotating a turntable.
93. Li Yuan, The Classic of the Waterways of Sichuan, I:27a–28b. The numbering has been
added.
94. The idea that the text means ‘drying away from the sunlight’ is a guess in as much as
‘drying’ has to be supplied.
95. Background information is taken from ZGZRZYCS, 30 (Guangdong), mainly chapter
7, ‘Climatic resources’.
96. Ji Han, Flora of Southeast Asia, 32.
97. Ipomoea aquatica.
98. Ji Han, Flora of Southeast Asia, 15–17.
99. Areca catechu.
100. Piper betle.
101. Su Dongpo, Complete Works, XI:79–80.
102. Qu Dajun, Guangdong xinyu [New comments on Guangdong] (1700; reprinted,
Zhonghua shuju: Hong Kong, 1974), especially 609–68.

Notes to pages 72–9
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.

485

Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 616–18.
There are a photograph and a drawing in Jeník, Forests, 67, 263.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 615–16.
Firmiana may be a misidentiﬁcation here. Possibly some other species with a samara
(winged seed) is indicated.
Arenga pinnata.
Livistona chinensis.
Tilia miquelana. Mistakenly identiﬁed as the Bo tree under which the Buddha attained
enlightenment.
Glyptostrobus pensilis.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 631.
By Sheng Hongzhi.
Cited in Sugimoto Kenji, “Timber in ancient China,” 102–3.
This ‘Guiyang’ was probably only slightly to the north of Yangshan, near Lian county
in the north of modern Guangdong.
Aquilaria agallocha.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 669–72.
The text says “ants,” but termites are more plausibly associated with decomposing
wood and substantial mounds.
Yousu: a kind of perfume.
The passage in parentheses has been interpolated here from p. 671 to clarify the nature
of the technique.
Or, perhaps, “in which the perfume and the wood have not separated clearly.” The
sense is problematic.
Following a common convention, the terms ‘in-migrants’ and ‘out-migrants’ are used
for people who move within a political unit, in contrast with ‘immigrants’ and
‘emigrants’ who move from one state to another.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 609.
Ursa major.
Over the pass between the two provinces.
Of phloem and xylem.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 612.
The translation of the second sentence is a conjecture, though the only one that seems
to ﬁt the context.
R. B. Marks, Tigers, Rice, Silk, and Silt (Cambridge University Press: New York,
1998), 326.
Qu Dajun, New Comments on Guangdong, 624.
See, for example, J. Gonda, Les Religions de l’Inde, vol. 1, Védisme et hindouisme ancien
(translated from the German; Payot: Paris, 1979), 378–80.
S. Guha, Environment and Ethnicity in India, 1200–1991 (Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, 1999), 153–4. For the last few hundred years and the British Raj, see also
49–53 and 136–7.
Later called Huangyuan county under the Republic.
Note the ‘Huang’ here was not the Yellow River. The Chinese character is a homophone
but not a homograph.
Domesday Book was a detailed nationwide survey of the resources of England made
in 1085–6 at the orders of William the Conqueror.
Li Qing, ed., Qinghai difang jiu zhi wu-zhong [Five old gazetteers from Qinghai]
(Qing; reprinted, Qinghai Renmin chubanshe: Xining, 1989), hereafter QHDFJZWZ,
237–40.

486

Notes to pages 79–88

136. QHDFJZWZ, 235–7.
137. Chinese ‘feet’ and ‘inches’. Conversion ratios varied locally, but were near enough to
allow the terms to be left unadjusted here, since no guide to an exact local equivalent
is available.
138. See, for example, QHDFJZWZ, 351, and for background, 287–8.
139. Because the rate of increase in a logistic starts slowing down after a certain point and
the curve heads asymptotically toward a maximum value. The exponential, in
contrast, explodes off the top of the graph at a rate that increases for ever (in the world
of the mind, at least).

5 War and the Logic of Short-term Advantage
1. Xiaoneng Yang, Reﬂections of Early China: Decor, Pictographs, and Pictorial Inscriptions
(Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art with the University of Washington Press: Seattle,
Wash., 2000), 175.
2. J. Baechler, Esquisse d’une histoire universelle (Fayard: Paris, 2002), 63.
3. J. Golson, “From horticulture to agriculture in the New Guinea highlands: A case study
of people and their environments,” in P. Kirch and T. Hunt, eds., Historical Ecology in
the Paciﬁc Islands (Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn., 1997). Under certain
circumstances the degradation of forest soils after they had been subjected to a shifting
horticultural system of multiple crops in each unit of area led to the development of a
more stable but tilled agricultural system with a single crop per plot, located within
regular ditches and later on raised beds.
4. M. Cohen, Health and the Rise of Civilization (Yale University Press: New Haven,
Conn., 1989), generally and 119 and 214 on the tendency for average body size to fall in
the Neolithic.
5. L. H. Greenwood, Epidemics and Crowd Diseases (Macmillan: New York, 1935); F.
McFarlane Burnet, Natural History of Infectious Diseases, rev. edn (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1972).
6. J. Swabe, Animals, Disease and Human Society: Human–Animal Relations and the Rise
of Veterinary Medicine (Routledge: London, 1999), esp. chapters 1, 2, and 3.
7. C. K. Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of Egypt, The
Levant, Mesopotamia, India and China (Routledge: London, 1999), 344.
8. There is an excellent summary of the process as described in Western scholarship in
Maisels, Early Civilizations, chapter 5. Chapter 6 puts China into a comparative OldWorld perspective.
9. J. Gledhill, B. Bender, and M. Larsen, eds., State and Society: The Emergence and Development of Social Hierarchy and Political Centralization (1988; reprinted, Routledge:
London, 1995).
10. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 62–3, 65, 68, 110, 149, 151–2, and 205.
11. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 68.
12. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 71.
13. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 23, 94, and 98.
14. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 78 and 93.
15. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 92 and 97.
16. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 63 and 201.
17. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 67.
18. Gledhill et al., State and Society, 157.

Notes to pages 88–90
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.
42.

43.

487

Gledhill et al., State and Society, 113, 149, and 152–3.
Gledhill et al., State and Society, 149.
Gledhill et al., State and Society, 149, 152–3, chapter 11, 193, 195–6, and 202.
For sketches of patterns close to the opposite end of the range of sizes, see L. Mitchell
and P. Rhodes, eds., The Development of the Polis in Archaic Greece (Routledge: London,
1997).
Primarily in J. Baechler, Démocraties (Calmann-Lévy: Paris, 1985), but also in J.
Baechler, Nature et histoire (Presses Universitaires de France: Paris, 2000).
Baechler, Nature et histoire, 152 and 246–7.
Baechler, Démocraties, 658 and 660.
Baechler, Démocraties, 659.
Baechler, Démocraties, 662.
Baechler, Démocraties, 620, 623, and 665, and Baechler, Nature et histoire, 449.
Baechler, Démocraties, 616.
Baechler, Démocraties, 666.
Baechler, Démocraties, 667.
Baechler, Démocraties, 629.
Baechler, Démocraties, 613.
Baechler, Démocraties, 629.
Baechler, Démocraties, 625.
Baechler, Démocraties, 641.
Baechler, Démocraties, 663.
Baechler, Démocraties, 667.
Or, exceptionally, in what is now Zhejiang province, massive platforms raised on hill
tops. See Xiaoneng Yang, Reﬂections of Early China, 174.
Two books by Mark Lewis offer a background to several of these themes, even though
they are written from a different perspective. These are M. E. Lewis, Sanctioned
Violence in Early China (State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y. 1990) and
Writing and Authority in Early China (State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y.,
1999). On early pictograms, see Kaizuka Shigeki, Chūgoku kodai sai hakken [Further
discoveries about Chinese antiquity] (Iwanami: Tokyo, 1979), 70.
Song Zhenhao, Xia-Shang shehui shenghuo shi [Social life under the Xia and Shang]
(Zhongguo shehui kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1994), 515–22.
B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription, and Translation (Museum
of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950), #305. The translation given here varies at
points from the accepted version. The only item about which the reader needs to be
warned is the term rendered ‘enfeoffment’. This is logical in terms of the usual
dictionary meanings and overall context, but not supported by commentators. The
usual rendering is by the adjective ‘great’ (in the sense that the subordinate states were
told they enjoyed ‘great good fortune’). Since Shirakawa Shizuka, Kōkotsubun no sekai
[The world of the oracle bone script] (Heibonsha: Tokyo, 1972), 142 and 148, talks of a
sort of royal ‘familial feudalism’ in Shang times, this makes the translation at least
arguable. For a similar view as regards late Shang, see Yabuuchi Kiyoshi, Chūgoku
bummei no keisei [The formation of Chinese Civilization] (Iwanami: Tokyo, 1974), 37,
42, and 45. Tang was the founder of the Shang-Yin. Yu was the last of the
sage–emperors, and famed for his hydraulic achievements. Jing and Chu were states in
the middle Yangzi region.
Assigning precise dates before the mid ninth century bce is a well-known problem in
archaic Chinese history. Here I follow D. Keightley, Sources of Shang History: The Oracle-

488

44.
45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

Notes to pages 90–5
Bone Inscriptions of Bronze Age China (University of California Press: Berkeley, Calif.,
1978), 174–6 and Table 38 on 228. Alternative views put the date considerably earlier.
Karlgren, Odes, #241. Chinese societies at this period still retained some of the characteristics of the social structure based on age-groups, hence the explicit addition of
‘cousins’ to ‘brothers’ and the gloss ‘kin of one generation’.
Drawings may be found in Song Zhenhao, Social life under the Xia and Shang, plate 56
(at the end of the volume). Liu Yang and E. Capon, Masks of Mystery: Ancient Chinese
Bronzes from Sanxingdui (Art Gallery of New South Wales: Sydney, 2000), provide
stunning color photographs.
Kaizuka Shigeki, Further Discoveries, 71, 101–2, and 107. Xiaoneng Yang, Reﬂections of
Early China, 47–82.
Song Zhenhao, Social Life under the Xia and Shang, 107.
Xu Jinxiong, Zhongguo gudai shehui [Ancient Chinese society] (Taiwan shangwu
yinshuguan: Taibei, 1988), 408–11.
Kaizuka Shigeki, Further Discoveries, 83–7. Photographs and map in K.-C. Chang,
Shang Civilization (Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn., 1980), 274–5.
Yabuuchi Kiyoshi, Formation of Chinese Civilization, 39.
Satō Taketoshi, Chūgoku kodai kogyō-shi no kenkyū [Researches on industries in
ancient China] (Yoshikawa kōbunkan: Tokyo, 1962), 1–20 and 116–20. See also Kaizuka
Shigeki, Further Discoveries, 88.
K.-C. Chang, Shang Civilization, 153–5. This only applies to one of the two species,
Cypraea annulus.
K. Polanyi, Primitive, Archaic and Modern Economies (Doubleday: New York, 1968),
280–305, stresses the links that cowry money had to the initial creation of states,
notably in west Africa.
Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 361.
Chao Lin, The Socio-Political System of the Shang Dynasty (Academia Sinica: Taibei,
1982), 61, 68, and 103. For a royal grave at Anyang with about 7,000 shells see 3.
Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 361–2.
Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 358.
Song Zhenhao, Social Life under the Xia and Shang, 236–7. The evidence relating to
Wang Hai is interesting but not conclusive.
Kaizuka Shigeki, Further Discoveries, 101.
Kaizuka Shigeki, Further Discoveries, 145. On the distribution of the sources of copper
and tin in Shang times, see K.-C. Chang, Shang Civilization, 131–3.
R. Fletcher, The Limits of Settlement Growth: A Theoretical Outline (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1995). On Shang urban drainage, see Song Zhenhao, Social Life
under the Xia and Shang, 26.
J. D. Hughes, Pan’s Travail: Environmental Problems of the Ancient Greeks and Romans
(Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, Md., 1994), 33. Ancient Egypt was less
confrontational.
Hughes, Pan’s Travail, 168.
Yang Kuan, Zhongguo gudai ducheng zhidu shi yanjiu [Researches in the history of the
systems of the capital cities of Chinese antiquity] (Shanghai guji chubanshe: Shanghai,
1993), 10, 13, and 16–17.
LJ: Liji [Records of ritual behavior] (later Han), in vol. 4 of Shisan jing zhushu [The thirteen scriptures] (reprinted, 7 vols., Chūbun shuppansha: Toyko, 1971), “Li yun,” 3059.
Yang Kuan, Capital Cities of Chinese Antiquity, 19, 20, 23–5, and 31–9. See also K.-C.
Chang, Shang Civilization, 134, 158–61, and 268.

Notes to pages 95–101
67.
68.
69.
70.

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.

489

Karlgren, Odes, #250.
Karlgren, Odes, #237.
Karlgren, Odes, #237.
See the introduction to W. A. Rickett, Guanzi: Political, Economic, and Philosophical
Essays from Early China (2 vols., Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J., vol. I, 1985,
vol. II, 1998). My translations were drafted before I consulted this painstaking and
valuable work. I have made many emendations after reading Rickett’s version, and owe
it a debt that should be acknowledged, even if at times I differ signiﬁcantly in my interpretations. References to his translation are marked with an ‘R’.
Huang Jie and Lin Boxhou, eds., Guanzi jiping [The Master Guan with collected
appraisals] (late fourth century bce; Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng bianyin
jijinhui: Taibei, 1978), hereafter GZ, 191–2 / R I:227.
GZ, 79 / R I:104.
Cited in Yang Kuan, Capital Cities of Chinese Antiquity, 242, footnote 2.
The translation of zhi qiao in the last sentence is highly speculative.
Yang Kuan, Capital Cities of Chinese Antiquity, 209–11, 219, 224–6, and 232.
The reference is to the old German tag ‘Stadtluft macht frei’.
Cheng Te-k’un, Archaeology in China, vol. 2, Shang (Heffer and Sons: Cambridge,
1960), 200; Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 361–2.
Xiaoneng Yang, Reﬂections of Early China, 200–3.
The ﬁnal speculations apart, this picture is based on Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone
World, 40–183; Xu Jinxiong, Ancient Chinese Society, 438–57; Song Zhenhao, Social Life
under the Xia and Shang, 452–532; Xiaoneng Yang, Reﬂections of Early China, 36, 43, 63,
116–17, 197, 200–3, and 211; K.-C. Chang, Shang Civilization, passim; and Cheng Te-k’un,
Archaeology in China, vol. 2, Shang, 134, 136 (unit of length), 200 (shells per string), and
225 (musical scales).
P. Clastres, Society against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology (1974; English
translation; Zone Books: New York, 1987).
Ling.
Shangdi or di.
Di.
Shima Kunio, Inkyo bokuji kenkyū [Researches on the divination texts from the ruins
of Yin] (Kyūko shoin: Tokyo, 1958), 198, 191–2, and 199.
Shima Kunio, Divination Texts, 206.
Shima Kunio, Divination Texts, 211.
Shima Kunio, Divination Texts, 416, 485–6, 493–4, and 502.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone World, 204 and 207–9. Also Yabuuchi Kiyoshi, Formation of Chinese Civilization, 37–8.
Shima Kunio, Divination Texts, 410–12.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone World, 188, 194, 199, 204–5, 209, and 211.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone World, 199 and 201.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone World, 189 and 192.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Oracle Bone World, 203.
S. Couvreur, Tch’ouen Ts’iou et Tso Tchouan: La Chronique de la principauté de Lou
(1914; reprinted, bilingual text, 3 vols., Cathasia: Paris, 1951), III:501–2, Ding 4.
Yabuuchi Kiyoshi, Formation of Chinese Civilization, 37.
Shirakawa Shizuka, Bronze Inscriptions, 60, 68, 78 158–61, 185, 249–50, 257, and 259.
Clastres, Society against the State, 202.
Clastres, Society against the State, 206.

490

Notes to pages 101–5

99. Clastres, Society against the State, 208.
100. Clastres, Society against the State, 214–18.
101. Discussed in M. Elvin, “Three thousand years of unsustainable growth: China’s
environment from archaic times to the present,” East Asian History 6 (Nov. 1993), 17–18.
102. ‘War economy’, the term given during the First World War to the command system of
production developed in Germany by Walther Rathenau.
103. As noted earlier, the use of the plural here is unusual in works of English, though
normal in French, while the Chinese term permits either translation. For a brief
discussion and a reference please see Table 1 on page 6 above.
104. Hughes, Pan’s Travail, 198–9.
105. GZ, 108–9 / R I:131.
106. GZ, 152 / R I:195.
107. GZ, 152–3 / R I:195.
108. GZ, 198 / R I:230. R renders “if the ruler . . . is unrestrained in the area of resources, . . .
the people will have no rest in their expenditure of energy.”
109. GZ, 202 / R I:233. R renders ‘armed forces’ as ‘state’.
110. GZ, 350–1 / R I:370.
111. GZ, 183 / R I:220. R reads ‘the nations’s knights’ for ‘state’s territory’.
112. GZ, 192–3 / RI:227.
113. The term ye refers to the cleared space beyond the permanently farmed core but before
the surrounding woods. In later times ye has tended to acquire the sense of ‘wild’, ‘the
wilds’, or ‘wilderness’.
114. R renders ‘do not collect their harvests’ rather than ‘cannot be retained’.
115. GZ, 198 / R I:230.
116. SJS: Shangjun shu jiegu dingben [The book of the Lord of Shang, deﬁnitive edition with
explanations] (pre-Qin; Guji chubanshe: Beijing, 1956), 7, ‘Kenling’. This passage is also
cited by Yoshinami Takashi, “Chūgoku kodai santaku-ron no saikentō” [A re-examination of the theories about ‘mountains and marshes’ in ancient China], in Chūgoku
Suiri Shi Kenkyūkai, ed., Chūgoku suiri shi ronshu [A collection of essays on the history
of water control in China] (Kokusho kanōkai: Tokyo, 1981), 11.
117. GZ, 296 / R I:325.
118. The ‘seasonal rains’ were traditionally assigned to the late spring of the lunar calendar.
The main rains in north China today fall from mid June till late August, and so the term
fairly certainly does not apply to these but to the return of some limited rainfall after
the dry winter. Rainfall patterns more than two thousand years ago may have been
different, but there is a faint bimodal pattern at present, north of about 30°, with a ﬁrst,
and very small, peak in April. See Ding Yihui, Monsoons over China (Kluwer: Dordrecht,
1994), 29. See also J. Chapman, “Climate,” in J. L. Buck, ed., Land Utilization in China
(1937; reprinted, Paragon: New York, 1964), 111.
119. GZ, 297 / R I:325–6. R puts the passage in the past tense, which is one legitimate way of
reading it.
120. GZ, 321–2 / R I:346.
121. GZ, 83–4 / R I:107–8.
122. Derk Bodde has noted that ze, which is normally translated ‘marshes’, and which I
often render as ‘wetlands’, is sometimes used in contexts where a watery environment
does not seem very likely. This includes references to their being burnt. ‘Meadows’, or,
in my view, ‘open bushland’ may therefore at times be a better reading. See D. Bodde,
“Marshes in Mencius and elsewhere: A lexicographical note,” in D. Roy and T. Tsien,
eds., Ancient China: Studies in Early Civilization (Chinese University Press: Hong
Kong, 1978).

Notes to pages 106–16

491

123. GZ, 605–8 / R II:247–50.
124. This last is a guess, based on taking cai as having the meaning of sui, ‘years of age’, and
seeing a plausible parallel in Hoshi Ayao, Chūgoku shakai-keizai-shi go-i [Glossary of
terms in China’s social and economic history] (Kindai Chūgoku kenkyūsentā: Tokyo,
1966), 164, entry caiguan.
125. Literally a ‘bag’, that is, an enclosure.
126. GZ, 304 / R I:330–1.
127. For example, GZ 109, 111, and 149.
128. HNZ:Huainanzi [The book of the Prince of Huainan] (Second century bce; reprinted,
Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng bianyin jijinhui: Taibei, 1978), 8: 257–61. My
attention was ﬁrst drawn to this passage by H. Roetz’s essay, “On nature and
culture in Zhou China,” unpublished paper presented to the conference on “Understanding Nature in China and Europe until the eighteenth century,” Rheine, March
2000.
129. ‘Vital aethers’ are qì, which I often translate as ‘matter–energy–vitality’. The underlying
sense is ‘breath’ conceived of as an attenuated form of animate matter.
130. Cp. H. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China: Zum Subjekt-Objekt-Gegensatz in der
klassischen chinesischen Philosophie (Lang: Frankfurt am Main, 1984), 128–35.
131. SGZ: Sanguo zhi [Record of the Three Kingdoms] (Jin; reprinted, Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1969), “Wei shu,” 28: 775–6. This passage is also discussed in Sakuma Kichiya,
Gi Shin Nanboku-chō suiri-shi kenkyū [A study of the history of water control under
the Wei, Jin and Northern and Southern Dynasties] (Kaimei shoin: n.p., 1980), 13–14,
and in Elvin, “Three Thousand Years,” 24.
132. Li Qing, ed., Qinghai difang jiu zhi wu-zhong [Five old local gazetteers from Qinghai]
(Qing; reprinted, Qinghui Renmin chubanshe: Xining, 1989), hereafter QHDFJZWZ,
627–8. The subordinate was Deputy Military Commissioner Liu Minkuan, stationed at
Xining.
133. The catty or jin was about 590 grams. See Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liangheng kao [Researches on measures of length, capacity, and weight in the successive
Chinese dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1992), 491.
134. Hematite, the principal source of iron, when well crystallized, has “glittering mirrorlike surfaces.” See A. Hallam, ed., Planet Earth (Phaidon: Oxford, 1977), 130 (and
photograph).
135. Coke, or ‘charcoal coal’, was also sometimes used for smelting iron ore in the Northwest.
See QHDFJZWZ, 581.
136. The stele text has a gap of a character at this point.
137. Hoshi Ayao, The Tribute Grain Transport under the Ming Dynasty, translated M. Elvin
(Center for Chinese Studies: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1969).

6 Water and the Costs of System Sustainability
1. See the comments of J. Radkau, Natur und Macht: Eine Weltgeschichte der Umwelt
(Beck: München, 2000), esp. chapter 3 “Wasser, Wald und Macht.”
2. Shiba Yoshinobu, Sōdai Kōnan keizai-shi no kenkyū [Researches on the economic
history of Jiangnan under the Song] (Tōyō Daigaku Tōyō Bunka Kenkyūjo: Tokyo,
1988), 403–22. Yuanzhou in early Song times had 20,000 to 25,000 inhabitants.
3. J. Needham with Wang Ling and Liu Gwei-djen, Science and Civilisation in China, vol.
4.III, Civil Engineering and Nautics (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1971),
350–60.

492

Notes to pages 116–23

4. Morita Akira, Shindai suirishi kenkyū [Researches on the history of water control
under the Qing dynasty] (Aki shobō: Tokyo, 1974), 118–34.
5. Yu Yue, ed., Tongzhi Shanghai xianzhi [Gazetteer of Shanghai county for the Tongzhi
reign] (Shanghai, 1871), 4:43a.
6. A ‘polder’ may be deﬁned as an area that for at least some part of the year lies below
the mean level of the water outside it, and from which it is protected by a dike.
7. M. Elvin, “Market towns and waterways: The county of Shang-hai from 1480 to 1910,”
in G. W. Skinner, ed., The City in Late Imperial China (Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif., 1977), 466–7. ‘Public selection’ indicates a form of informal election, that
is, without quantiﬁed balloting.
8. Morita Akira, Qing Water Control, 161.
9. Morita Akira, Qing Water Control, 364.
10. M. Elvin, “On water control and management during the Ming and Ch’ing periods: A
review article,” in Ch’ing-shih wen-t’i 3.3 (Nov. 1975), 89.
11. See K. A. Wittfogel, Oriental Despotism (Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn.,
1957) for the extreme version. The same author’s Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas
(Harrassowitz: Leipzig, 1931) is more measured.
12. M. Elvin and N. Su, “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic factors in the
changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay, circa 1000–1800,” Environment and History
1.1 (Feb. 1995), 47–8.
13. Morita Akira, Qing Water Control, 289.
14. See K. MacPherson, “Cholera in China 1820–1930: An aspect of the internationalization
of infectious disease,” in M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments of Time: Environment
and Society in Chinese History (Cambridge University Press: New York, 1998), esp.
497–8.
15. D. Perkins, Agricultural Development in China 1368–1968 (Edinburgh University Press:
Edinburgh, 1969), 60–5 and 333–44.
16. Shuili shuidian kexue yanjiu-yuan and Wuhan shuili dianli xueyuan, eds., Zhongguo
shuili-shi gao [Draft history of water control in China], xia, 2–12.
17. Tsuruma Kazuyuki, “Shōsuikyo Tokōen Teikokukyo wo tazunete: Shin teikoku no
keisei to Sensokuki no san daisuiri jigyō” [A visit to the Zhang river canal, the Du river
dike, and the Zheng Guo canal: On the formation of the Qin empire and the three
great hydraulic schemes of the Warring States period], Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 17
(1987), 40–1. The numerical data are all taken from this source.
18. Li Yuan, Shu shuijing [The classic of the waterways of Sichuan] (1794; reprinted, 2 vols.,
Ba-Shu shushe: Chengdu, 1985), 2:11b. See also Needham, Science and Civilisation in
China, 4.III, 293.
19. H. Chamley, Sédimentologie (Dunod: Paris, 1987), 142.
20. Shuili shuidian kexue yanjiu-yuan, Draft History of Water Control, shang, 66–70.
21. Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, 4.III, 285–7; Tsuruma, “Great hydraulic
schemes of the Warring States,” 44; Shuili shuidian kexue yanjiu-yuan, Draft History of
Water Control, shang, 118–32.
22. P.-E. Will, “Clear waters versus muddy waters The Zheng-bai irrigation system of
Shaanxi province in the late-imperial period,” in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time,
283–343.
23. W. B. Arthur,“Positive feedbacks in the economy,” Scientiﬁc American 262.2 (Feb. 1990),
84–5.
24. Examples are the VHS video system, the Fortran programing language (now fading),
the QWERTY layout of the standard typewriter keyboard, and English spelling.

Notes to pages 124–33

493

25. M. Elvin, D. Crook, Shen Ji, R. Jones, and J. Dearing, “The impact of clearance and irrigation on the environment in the Lake Erhai catchment from the ninth to the nineteenth century,” East Asian History 23 (June 2002).
26. Li Zhiyang, ed., Jiajing Dali fuzhi [Jiajing reign-period Dali prefectural gazetteer]. (1563
(incomplete), microﬁlm 1055 in the Menzies Library), Australian National University,
1:56b. On ‘commoner–civilians’ see footnote 8.15.
27. Dali Prefectural Gazetteer, 1:57a.
28. Dali Prefectural Gazetteer, 1:57a.
29. This presumably refers to timber already cut and stacked for use, and so a particularly
tempting target.
30. Dali Prefectural Gazetteer, 1:57b.
31. Hou Yunqin, comp. and rev., Dengchuan zhouzhi [Dengchuan department gazetteer]
(1854/1855; reprinted, Chengwen chubanshe: Taibei, 1968), 82.
32. Dengchuan Department Gazetteer, 79 and 82.
33. Dengchuan Department Gazetteer, 90–103.
34. Cited in Li Yuanfang, “Fei-Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de yanbian” [Changes in the deltas of
the abandoned Yellow River], Dili xuebao 10.4 (1991), 38, footnote 39.
35. Tani Mitsutaka, Mindai Kakō-shi kenkyū [Studies on the hydraulics of the Yellow River
in the Ming dynasty] (Dōhōsha: Kyōto, 1991), 20.
36. Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 17.
37. Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 165. His name was Shu Yinglong.
38. On this theme see R. Dodgen, Controlling the Dragon: Confucian Engineers and the
Yellow River in Late Imperial China (Hawaii University Press: Honolulu, 2001). When I
say “dirtied his hands,” this has probably to be interpreted metaphorically.
39. Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 271.
40. This account is based mainly on Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River. I am most grateful to
Professor Tani for the gift of his book.
41. Tuotuo, et al., eds. Jin shi [History of the Jin] (Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing,
1975), “Hequ zhi,” 27:670.
42. Tuotuo, History of the Jin, 27:674. It was usual, as already noted, to distinguish ‘position-power’ from ‘strength’. Wang Chong, for example, noted that while cattle and
horses had greater strength (li) than the mosquitoes and gnats who pestered them,
they had less position-power (shi). See Huang Hui, ed., Lun heng jiaoshi [Wang
Chong’s ‘Discourses weighed in the balance’, corrected and explained] (Han; 4 vols.
Shangwu yinshuguan: Taibei, 1964), hereafter LHJS, 145.
43. For a channel of given roughness and slope, the speed of the water varies as the twothirds power of R, the cross-sectional ﬂow area divided by the length of the wetted
perimeter. The capacity to carry sediment is proportional to the fourth power of this
speed.
44. Tuotuo, History of the Jin, 27:678.
45. At 33° 30´ N, 114° 50´ E.
46. At 32° 30´ N, 116° 45´ E.
47. Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, citing the Baoying tujing: introduction, 20, footnote 24
and main text, 5–6.
48. Cited in Wu Qihua [Wu Chi-hua], “Huanghe zai Mingdai gaidao qianxi hejue
Zhangqiu-de niandai” [On the date of the breach at Zhangqiu just prior to the change
of course of the Yellow River in the Ming dynasty], in Wu Qihua, ed., Mingdai shehui
jingji shiluncong [Collected historical essays on the society and economy of the Ming
dynasty] (Taiwan xuesheng shuju: Taibei, 1970), 368.

494

Notes to pages 133–9

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

I.e., the Qin He in Handan in northern Zhili.
Wu Qihua, “On the date of the breach at Zhangqiu,” 375.
Li Yuanfang, “Abandoned Yellow River delta,” 30.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 54.
Zhu Shang.
Fu Zehong, ed., Xingshui jinjian [The golden mirror of the passing streams] (c. 1725;
reprinted, Wenhai: Taibei, 1969, in Shen Yunlong, ed., Zhongguo shuiliyaoji congbian),
23:958.
Gu Zuyu, ed., Dushi fangyu jiyao [Essential geography for the reading of history] (1667;
reprinted, Xinxing: Taibei 1972), chuandu 3, “Da He” xia, 126:6b. Also cited in Tani
Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 12.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 53.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 24, footnote 29.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 64.
Li Yuanfang, “Abandoned Yellow River delta,” 30.
A traditional phrase for the total transformation of a situation.
Gu Yanwu, comp., Tianxia junguo libing shu [Documents on the advantageous and
disadvantageous aspects of the principates and commanderies of the empire]
(1639–62; reprinted, Shangwu yinshuguan: Shanghai, 1936), ‘Huai’, ce 10, [13], 56ab.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, ‘Huai’, ce 10 [13], 44b.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, ‘Huai’, ce 10 [13], 44b.
For an excellent introduction to Pan’s work, see E. Vermeer, “P’an Chi-hsün’s solutions
for the Yellow River problems of the late sixteenth century,” T’oung Pao LXXIII (1987).
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 373.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 374.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 374.
Tani Mitsutaka, Yellow River, 392. On the name ‘menxian sediments’ see Zhang Tingyu,
ed., Ming shi [History of the Ming dynasty] (Qing; reprinted, Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1974), “Hequ zhi er,” “Huanghe xia,” 84:2059.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2052.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2051.
Natura non vincitur nisi parendo.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2056.
Zhang Zhenguan.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2056.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2056.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2057.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2060–2.
Zhang Tingyu, Ming History, 84:2062.
See the life of Jin Fu in A. Hummel, ed., Eminent Chinese of the Ch’ing Period (2 vols,
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce: Washington, D.C., 1943), 161–3.
Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 47: 1718–19. See also 51:1836–7.
Converting at 1 Chinese foot = 0·35814 meters, following Naval Intelligence Division,
China Proper (His Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce: Edinburgh, 1945), III:610. This was
presumably the length of waterway diked, not the total length of dike, which ran on
both sides. The distance from Yunti-guan to the sea was taken at this time as approximately 100 li (Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 48:1730), about 50 kilometers, or 57.6 according to the China Proper table. In other words, not greatly
different from 64.5 km.
Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 52:1875.

55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.

82.

Notes to pages 139–45

495

83. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 50:1818–19.
84. Jin Fu was of the opinion that the river mouth was still large enough to carry the peak
discharge in the middle of the century. See Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing
Streams, 48:1749–50, and also Jin’s comment in 1677 that the lowest section of the main
course had “all silted up and become land” for “more than ten years,” in eodem, 48:1725.
85. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 49:1783.
86. Wang Zhibin, “Huanghe wenti-de jidian kanfa—dui Wei.Jin.Nanbeichao” [Some
understanding of the issue of the Yellow River during the Wei, the Jin, and the
Northern and Southern dynasties], Renmin Huanghe 5 (1980), and “Kaifeng Huanghe
jueyi mantan” [A general discussion of the breaking of the Yellow River dikes at
Kaifeng], Renmin Huanghe 4 (1984).
87. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 47:1721.
88. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 48:1751 and 49:1767.
89. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 48:1725–6.
90. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 49:1768–9.
91. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 48:1726.
92. Fu Zehong, Golden Mirror of the Passing Streams, 49:1775.
93. J. Leonard, Controlling from Afar: The Daoguang Emperor’s Management of the Grand
Canal Crisis, 1824–1826 (Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan: Ann
Arbor, Mich., 1996).
94. I. Amelung, “Der Gelbe Fluss in Shandong (1851–1911): Überschwemmungskatastrophen und ihre Bewältigungen im spät-kaiserlichen China” (Ph.D. thesis, Institut für
Philosophie, Wissenschaftstheorie, Wissenschafts- und Technikgeschichte, Technische
Universität Berlin, 1999).
95. On the canal, which also had irrigation functions, see Sheng Hongyuan and Qiu
Zhirong, “Woguo zuizao-de rengong yunhe zhi yi: Shanyin gu shuidao” [One of the
oldest man-made waterways in our land: The old Shanyin canal], and Yao Hanyuan,
“Zhedong yunhe-shi kaolüe” [A summary of a historical investigation into the Zhedong
Canal], both in Sheng Honglang, ed., Jianhu yu Shaoxing shuili [Mirror Lake and water
control in Shaoxing] (Zhongguo shudian: Beijing, 1991). The oldest section of this
composite waterway, partly constructed and partly adapted from natural streams, goes
back to the ﬁfth century bce. As a continuous system across the Shaoxing plain it probably dates from between the early fourth and the ﬁfth century ce.
96. Lin Chengkun, “Changjiang-kou nisha-de laiyuan fenxi yu shiliang jisuan-de yanjiu”
[Analysis of the sources and quantitities of sediments at the estuary of the Yangzi
River], Dili xuebao 44.1 (1989), and “Changjiang yu Hangzhou-wan-de nisha yu
hechuang yanbian dui Shanghai ji qi tonghai hangdao jianshe-de yingxiang” [The
inﬂuence of the sediment in the Yangzi River estuary and Hangzhou Bay, and changes
in the river bed, on the port of Shanghai and the construction of shipping channels
giving access to the sea], Dili xuebao 45.1 (1990), 80; and also Cao Peikui, Gu
Guochuan, Dong Yongfa, and Hu Fangxi, “Hangzhou-wan nisha yundong-de jiben
tezheng” [The basic characteristics of sediment transport in Hangzhou Bay], Huadong
Shifan Daxue xuebao 3 (1985), 75.
97. Zhou Sheng, Ni Haoqing, Zhao Yongming, Yang Yongchun, Wang Yifan, Lü Wende,
and Liang Baoxiang,“Qiantangjiang shuixia fanghu gongcheng-de yanjiu yu shijian”
[Research and practice relating to the protective underwater engineering on the
Qiantang River], Shuilixuebao 1 (1992), 23.
98. Cheng Mingjiu (Hezhu), comp., Sanjiangzha-wu quanshu [Complete documents
relating to the affairs of the lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth] (prefaces of 1684, 1685, and
1687; published in 1702, republished with a continuation in 1854 (by Ping Heng),

496

99.
100.
101.

102.
103.
104.
105.

106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.

Notes to pages 145–50
Sanjiangzha-wu quanshu xuke [Supplement to the Complete Documents Relating to the
Affairs of the Lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth] (prefaces of 1835 and 1836)), shang, 2:2a. I am
very grateful to Professor Shiba Yoshinobu for the gift of a copy of this book.
Within the imperial period at least the major southern cleft, or ‘sea gate’, seems to have
been the regular mouth until the seventeenth century.
Su Shi, Su Dongpoji [Collected works of Su Dongpo] (Song: Shangwu yinshu-guan:
Shanghai, 1939), ce 5, 9:53.
Cited in Chen Jiyu, Luo Zude, Chen Dechang, Xu Haigen, and Qiao Pengnian,
“Qiantang-jiang hekou shakan-de xingcheng ji qi lishi yanbian” [The formation of and
the historical changes in the sandbar at the mouth of the Qiantang River], Dili xuebao
30.2 (June 1964), 121.
At this date between Mount Kan and Mount Zhe, not the present mouth.
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongguo ziran dili [Natural geography of China]
(Kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1982), 238–42. ‘Wangpan’ is also written ‘Huangpan’.
Morita Akira, “Kōetsu ni okeru kaitō no suiri soshiki” [The hydraulic organization for
seawalls in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces] (1965; reprinted in Morita Akira,
Researches on the History of Water Control under the Qing dynasty, 1974).
F. Pearce, “Tidal warming,” New Scientist 1.iv (2000), 12, summarizing the research of
Charles Keeling. Tides are said to have reached their maximum strength around 1425
as part of an 1,800–year cycle contributing to driving climatic change. Tidal maxima
in this cycle are associated with cold conditions.
Gu Zuyu, Essential Geography, 3760.
RHXZ: Renhe xianzhi [Renhe county gazetteer] (reprinted, Chengwen: Taibei, 1975);
Zhonghua fangzhi congshu #179, Huazhong), 390.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, ‘Zhejiang’ xia: 3b–4a.
Haining xianzhi [Gazetteer of Haining county] (1765; reprinted, Chengwen: Taibei,
1983), Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #516, Huazhong, hereafter HNXZ, 461 and 463.
HNXZ, 1663.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 42ab.
Compare HNXZ, 463: “The 20 kilometers south of the county capital have turned
entirely into sea.”
Liu Hou.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 42b–43a. Compare HNXZ,
463.
In Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 47ab.
The discoloration of the coastal water due to its load of sediment is strikingly visible
from satellite photographs.
Converting at 1 qing = 100 mou = approximately 7 hectares.
The passage within braces only appears in the HNXZ, 471.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 46b.
Di Junlian, ed., Haitang-lu [A record of the seawall], in Qinding siku quanshu, Shi-bu,
ce 583 (compiled between 1764 and 1781; reprinted, Wenyuan-ge edn., Taiwan shangwu
yinshu-guan: Taibei, 1986, hereafter HTL, 667. His name was Zhang Cizhong.
Probably the xia ba shan off Zhapu.
At this period in the southwest corner of Xiaoshan county.
Probably at the Lower Yan Family Bay on the right bank obliquely opposite Mount
Wentang. See Hangzhou fuzhi [Hangzhou prefectural gazetteer] (1898, prefaces of 1888,
1894, and 1898; reprinted, Chengwen: Taibei, 1974), Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #199,
Huazhong, hereafter HZFZ /Q, map, 256.

Notes to pages 150–6
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.

139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.

147.
148.
149.
150.

497

HNXZ, 474–5.
Zhu Shi.
HNXZ, 477.
HTL, 323–4.
HTL, 331.
HNXZ, 342, and compare 351.
Such scars were thought to indicate the imminent removal of the sediment in which
they appeared.
Located east of Mount Chanji and on the northeast extremity of the south bank of the
Central Cleft. See HNXZ, 70–1.
HTL, 353.
Sun Xiangping, et al., Zhongguo yan'an haiyang shuiwen qixiang gaikuang [An outline
of the hydrological patterns and weather of China’s coastal seas] (Kexue chubanshe:
Beijing, 1981), 13.
Chen Jiaqi, “Nan Song yilai Taihu liuyu dalao-dahan ji jinqi qushi guji” [Major ﬂoods
and droughts in the Lake Tai basin since the Southern Song, and an estimation of the
trend in the near future], Dili yanjiu 6.1 (Mar. 1987).
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 50a. The term taken to indicate facing is zou/zhou, which means ‘a well’, and ‘to repair a well’.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 41b. There are similar
comments in Gu Zuyu, Essential Geography, 3833–4.
Zhou Xucai, comp., and Yu Qing, rev., Shaoxing fu zhi [Gazetteer for Shaoxing prefecture] (1719; reprinted, Chengwen: Taibei, 1983), Zhongguo fangzhi congkan, #537,
Huazhong, hereafter SXFZ, 591.
The quotation from Ma Yaoxiang below describes this lock as lying to “the north.”
Cheng Mingjiu’s Three Rivers’ Lock (Xia, xia: 34a [from the sequence, the given pagination being faulty here]) says that it is 45 li (≈ 22.5 km] northwest of Shanyin county
capital, that is Shaoxing, at the foot of Baima, that is, White Horse, Mountain.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 48a.
Chen Jiyu, Luo Zude, Chen Dechang, Xu Haigen, and Qiao Pengnian, “The sandbar at
the mouth of the Qiantang River.”
HNXZ, 469.
The character in the text is unclear. Zhu qi (‘all the streams’) may be Zhe qi (‘[Mount]
Zhe’s streams’), but Mount Zhe is too small to have any major stream, so the reading
given seems best.
In Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 43a–44b.
Present-day Pujiang.
Present-day Zhuji.
In the middle of the ﬁrst millennium ce, the Puyang River entered a lake, the Linpu,
north of where Linpu town stands today, but which has long since vanished, and then
passed through a narrow channel into Fisherman’s Inlet (Yupu ), also now disappeared, which in turn emptied into the Qiantang some way upstream of Hangzhou
city. See Chen Qiaoyi, “Lun lishi shiqi Puyang-jiang xiayou-de hedao bianqian”
[Changes in the lower course of the Puyang River in historical times], Lishi dili 1 (1981),
and Shiba Yoshinobu, Economic History of Jiangnan, 554–5 and 64.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 47a.
Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 47ab.
Cited in Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 48b.
Taking 4 square li as 1 square kilometer.

498

Notes to pages 156–63

151. Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 47b–48a.
152. Located a short way upstream of the point where the Puyang River had been rerouted.
153. Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang ce: 50; fuzhu [appended notes]:
60a, note 9. The stones of the piers were tapered where they met the impact of the
water, “so that they did not ﬁght with it.”
154. Gu Yanwu, Advantages and Disadvantages, Zhejiang xia: 49a.
155. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang, ‘Tang-shen shishi lu’, 12b.
156. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Xia, xia: 3a.
157. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Xia, xia: 36ab.
158. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Xia, xia: 38a.
159. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Xia, xia: 39a.
160. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang: 45b also speaks of removing ﬁshing
screens “so that the current of the river would ﬂow swiftly to the sea.”
161. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Xia, xia: 39b–41a.
162. This term seems originally to have referred in Song times to uncultivated ofﬁcial land
sold off for farming. See Sutō Yoshiyuki, Chūgoku tochi-seido-shi kenkyū [Studies of
land tenure systems in China] (Tokyo University Press: Tokyo, 1954), 194, note 11. Later
it could simply mean ‘untaxed land’, with an implication of its being heavily saline soil.
See Hoshi Ayao, comp., Chūgoku shakai keizai shi go-i zokuhen [Supplement to ‘A glossary of Chinese social and economic history’] (Kōbundō: Yamagata, 1975), 132.
163. HTL, 319.
164. HTL, 384.
165. HTL, 384.
166. HTL, 381–2.
167. HTL, 381. The term ‘glacis’ here indicates a sloping stone apron on the outside of the
sea-wall.
168. For the justiﬁcation of this translation, see shansun in E-tu Zen Sun, Ch’ing Administrative Terms: A Translation of the Terminology of the Six Boards with Explanatory Notes
(Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1961), #2428, 354.
169. Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao [Researches on measures of length,
capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing,
1992), 513, gives around 596 grams to the Qing-dynasty jin. The Chinese 10-‘inch’ ‘foot’
at this time was about 35.24 cm. Ibid., 118–19.
170. HTL, 383.
171. Meaning unclear. Perhaps the ‘roots’ were obstructions?
172. HTL, 365.
173. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, Lu preface: 2a.
174. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang: 35b.
175. Ping Heng, Sanjiangzha-wu quanshu xuke [Supplement to the Complete Documents
Relating to the Affairs of the Lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth] (no publisher indicated: n.p.,
1854), Prefaces of 1835 and 1836.
176. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, Luo preface: 1b.
177. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang: 14ab.
178. Huishu on its own was used, presumably as a mortar, to “stick stones together.” See
Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang: 16a.
179. Compare the account in Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ lock, Shang, shang: 16ab.
180. Cheng Mingjiu, Three Rivers’ Lock, Shang, shang: 20b–21a.
181. Liu Guangdou.
182. Ping Heng, Three Rivers’ Lock, Supplement, 1: 15a–16a.

Notes to pages 163–9

499

183. Unidentiﬁed place name, possibly related to the alternative name for Hangzhou Bay,
namely ‘Houhai’, and perhaps with a sense of ‘the defensive perimeter of the Hou Sea’.

7 Richness to Riches: The Story of Jiaxing
1. There are hints of an early environmental richness similar to Jiaxing’s in parts of the
north almost a thousand years earlier. But only hints. Thus, probably speaking of the
state of Han that around 800 bce lay in the Northeast, south of modern Beijing (and not
the better-known one in southeastern Shaanxi province), the Scripture of Songs says:
Far-spreading its wetlands and streams,
Plump and teeming its perch and its bream,
Stags and does thronging — the herds of its deer!
Bears, too, both the black, and bears brown-and-white.
All were there. And likewise its wildcats and tigers.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

This was where the ruler then “made walls of rammed earth, dug moats, laid out ﬁelds,
and compiled registers of population.” See B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text,
Transcription and Translation (Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950),
#261.
Xu Yaoguang et al., eds., Jiaxing fuzhi [Jiaxing prefectural gazetteer] (1879; 5 vols., revision of Wu Yangxian et al., comp., reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congshu as Huazhong
#53, Chengwen: Taibei, 1970), hereafter JXFZ/Q, 783.
The nature of this technology is a source of controversy among scholars. See Watabe
Tadayo and Sakurai Yumio, eds., Chūgoku Kōnan no inasaka bunka [The rice culture of
Jiangnan in China] (Nihon shōsō shuppan kyōkai: Tokyo, 1984), 1–54.
Shan Qing, Zhiyuan Jiàhe zhi [Gazeteer for Jiahe {≈ Jiaxing} in the Zhiyuan reignperiod (1264–94)] (Yuan; revision of Xu Shi, comp., reprinted in Zhonghua shuju
bianzhibu, ed., Song-Yuan fangzhi congkan, 8 vols., Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1990),
hereafter ZYJHZ, 4500.
ZYJHZ, 4422.
ZYJHZ, 4441–2.
ZYJHZ, 4442.
ZYJHZ, 4444, 4450, 4452, etc.
ZYJHZ, 4597.
ZYJHZ, 4451–2.
ZYJHZ, 4453, 4455.
JXFZ/Q, 523, and Cao Shuji, Qing shiqi [The Qing period], vol. 5 of Ge Jianxiong, ed.,
Zhongguo renkou shi [History of China’s population series] (Fudan daxue chubanshe:
Shanghai, 2001), 472.
JXFZ/Q, 521 notes that there were 223,038 households in Guiji commandery in ‘Han’ times
(a very long period, without specifying the date more precisely) and 1,032,604 inhabitants
(a mean of 4.6 persons per household). There were 26 xian units in Guiji, 2 of which were
in the Jiaxing area. Dividing by 13 gives 79,431 persons as a crude approximation.
JXFZ/Q, 524 and 528.
Shiba Yoshinobu, Sōdai Kōnan keizai-shi no kenkyū [Researches on the economic
history of Jiangnan under the Song] (Tōyō Daigaku Tōyō Bunka Kenkyūjo: Tokyo,
1988), 146. I have omitted the much lower ﬁgure of 116,850 for 980 ce as probably a
reﬂection of poor data collection in the early years of the dynasty.

500

Notes to pages 169–75

16. It now seems to be agreed that from 1776 to 1850 the ofﬁcial ﬁgures became reasonably
reliable. See Cao Shuji, Qing Period, 3.
17. JXFZ/Q, 523.
18. The precise Song rate was 0.57% a year, the later Qing one (1769 to 1838) was 0.26%.
19. Most of the mid- and late-Ming ofﬁcial population ﬁgures are unconvincing as they
hardly vary. From the 1420s through the 1520s they ﬂuctuate slightly within the range
between 833,000 and 735,000, and from the 1570s through the 1630s between 563,000
and 565,000. Qualitative evidence tends to suggest that for most of this period the real
trend is likely to have been upward rather than downward or steady. The ofﬁcial late
Ming ﬁgures could have been as low as a third of the true value. See Yim Shu-yuen,
“Famine relief statistics as a guide to the population of sixteenth-century-China: A
case-study of Honan province,” Ch’ing-shih wen-t’i 3.9 (Nov 1978).
20. It was they who sacriﬁced to the goddess of sericulture. See JXFZ/Q, 803.
21. JXFZ/Q, 793.
22. JXFZ/Q, 793.
23. M. Elvin and N. Su, “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic factors in the
changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay, circa 1000–1800,” Environment and History
1.1 (Feb. 1995) 42–4.
24. JXFZ/Q, 789.
25. JXFZ/Q, 789.
26. JXFZ/Q, 783.
27. JXFZ/Q, 784–5 and 788.
28. P. R. Katz, Demon Hordes and Burning Boats: The Cult of Marshal Wen in Late Imperial
Chekiang (State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y., 1995).
29. JXFZ/Q, 291.
30. Modern usage labels these the ‘plum rains’, as mei (‘plum’) is a homophone of mei
(‘mildew’). This is prettier but confusing as they do not have anything obvious to do
with plums. Plum blossoms appear from late March to early April in the Jiaxing
region. See C. Blunden and M. Elvin, Cultural Atlas of China, rev. edn (Facts on File:
New York, 1998), 29. This is somewhat too early for the rains, which are due to the
summer monsoon meeting cold air from the north above the lower Yangzi valley in
mid June to mid July. On the timing of the ‘plum rains’ see Ding Yihui, Monsoons over
China (Kluwer: Dordrecht, 1994), 19–22, 128, 134, and 195 et seq.
31. This passage cannot be dated for the time being.
32. Liu Yingke and Shen Shaozhong, eds., Jiaxing fuzhi [Jiaxing prefectural gazetteer] (1600;
reprinted as Huazhong #505, Chengwen: Taibei, 1983), hereafter JXFZ/M, 1842–3.
33. Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing shi duo [The Qing Bell of poesy] (originally Guochao
shiduo, 1869; reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), hereafter, QSD 473. In the last
line, ‘made one sick at heart’ might be a more accurate translation, but the term in the
Chinese can also indicate heartburn, which is not far from the idea of throwing up.
34. JXFZ/M, 1969–70.
35. There is an illegible character in the gazetteer text here. I have supplied what I hope is
an appropriate meaning.
36. The word ‘splashing’ is added to make sense of this line.
37. See A. Corbin, Le Territoire du vide: L’Occident et le désir du rivage, 1750–1840 (Aubier:
Paris, 1988).
38. ZYJHZ, 4514.
39. See Yoshida Teigo, “Umi no kosumorojii” [The cosmology of the sea], in Gotō Akira et
al., eds., Rekishi ni okeru shizen [Nature in history] (Iwanami: Tokyo, 1989).

Notes to pages 175–81

501

40. JXFZ/M, 1969.
41. Discussed in Elvin and Su, “Man against the sea.”
42. JXFZ/M, 509–13.
43. An unidentiﬁed place.
44. At this time on the south and north shores of old Hangzhou Bay.
45. The south side of the lower Yangzi delta.
46. M. Elvin and N. Su, “Action at a distance: The inﬂuence of the Yellow River on Hangzhou
Bay since ad 1000,” in M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments of Time: Environment and
Society in Chinese History (Cambridge University Press: New York, 1998), esp. 352.
47. JXFZ/M, 491–2.
48. This notion was archaizing fantasy.
49. The translation of this technical term is tentative.
50. The name of the locks here sounds the same but is not written with the same characters as the earlier reference to them.
51. Just as ‘dike’ in traditional English usage can refer either to the raised embankment or
the ditch running alongside it, so the Chinese term used here (tang) has a comparable
ambiguity.
52. Here, as earlier, where minor names with a clear sense are concerned, and
identiﬁcation on a map is not an important issue, I have often taken the liberty of
translating the meaning, in order to convey something of the ﬂavor of old Chinese
place-names.
53. JXFZ/M, 493.
54. I.e. 907–60 ce.
55. Chang Tang and Luo Shuhao, eds., Ganshui zhi [Gazetteer for Ganshui] (Song), reprinted
in Zhonghua shuju bianzhibu, ed., Song-Yuan fangzhi: congkan (Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1990), hereafter GSZ 5:4662.
56. That is, a dike across a waterway, blocking it, rather than a levee running parallel with
one of its banks.
57. About four to ﬁve meters. The ‘fathom’ was an archaic unit of height or depth, said to
represent the height of a human being. It was seven (or sometimes perhaps eight)
archaic ‘feet’. The foot (chi) was around 23.1 centimeters in Warring States times. See
Qiu Guangming, Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao [Researches on measures of length,
capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese dynasties] (Kexue chubanshe: Beijing,
1992), 11.
58. This translation of che suo, whose literal sense is something like ‘machinery rope’, is a
guess based on context.
59. Wine made from rice, not grapes.
60. JXFZ/M, 494–5.
61. Li Bozhong, Tangdai Jiangnan nongye-de fazhan [The development of agriculture in
Jiangnan under the Tang dynasty] (Nongye chubanshe: Beijing, 1990), 30, 86, and cp.
106 (on fallowing under the Song).
62. Li Bozhong, Agriculture in Tang Jiangnan, 41.
63. Li Bozhong, Agriculture in Tang Jiangnan, 51.
64. Li Bozhong, Agriculture in Tang Jiangnan, 89–95, 106–29, 149, and 190 et seq.
65. Shiba Yoshinobu, Economic History of Jiangnan, 146.
66. ZYJHZ, 4494.
67. JXFZ/Q, 196.
68. His surname was Yuan, but he is not otherwise identiﬁed. Possible candidates include
Yuan Jie and Yuan Zai.

502

Notes to pages 181–9

69. JXFZ/Q, 196.
70. The text says “more than 1000 li.” Jiaxing prefecture in Song times was 7790 km2, which
is roughly equivalent to 88 km by 88 km, so trying to ﬁt a length of about 500 km into
it, even a twisting and turning length, makes little sense. If li is taken as meaning a
‘square li’ then it is roughly on the order of one quarter of a square kilometer (0·5 ǂ
0·5 km). Hence “more than 1000 square li” probably indicates an area of the order of
250 km2, just under a ﬁfth of the total area. In Li Bozhong, Agriculture in Tang
Jiangnan, 86, the ﬁgure is given as “twisting and turning over an area of over a hundred
li.” If this means an area of 100 square li it is probably too small at about 25 km2. If, on
the contrary, it indicates 100 ǂ 100 linear li, then at 2500 km2, it is almost a third of
the entire area of the prefecture. Though this is not impossible, the ﬁgure of 1000
seems more likely.
71. That referring to sui, areas more than 100 li from a capital city. The reference is to the
quasi-classical work the Zhouli [The Rituals of Zhou] in Ruan Yuan, ed., Shisan jing
zhushu [The thirteen classics with notes and explanations] (Qing; reprinted, Zhonghua
shuju: Beijing, 1980), hereafter ZL], ‘diguan’, ‘xianglao’ section.
72. Once again an ofﬁcial designation from The Rituals of Zhou is used here.
73. JXFZ/Q, 196, account of the achievements of Zhu Gong.
74. JXFZ/Q, 196.
75. ZYJHZ 4532–3.
76. 406 mou. This was 0.285 of a square kilometer.
77. The term ‘mortgage’ is strictly inaccurate. It was not a loan on the security of landed
property but a purchase with a right of repurchase at the sale price by the vendors or
their heirs over an indeﬁnitely extended period of time.
78. Which ‘ministry’ was involved is not clear.
79. Xi Tianxi.
80. JXFZ/M, 853.
81. JXFZ/M, 498.
82. For example, the poem by Zhou Binhe in JXFZ/Q, 190.
83. GSZ, 5:4661.
84. GSZ, 5:4660 and 4671.
85. JXFZ/Q, 290.
86. That is, the ‘Japanese’, coastal raiders who were in fact mostly Chinese at this time.
87. Just to the south of Ganpu.
88. JXFZ/Q, 161.
89. Karlgren, Odes, #34. “The gourds have their bitter leaves, / The ford has a deep
crossing.” Another possible translation, given the reference, is ‘for a ford so deep that
one crosses it with one’s clothes on, a gourd is essential’, which employs an archaic
sense, namely ‘to ford fully dressed’, of the word rendered here in its normal later
meaning as ‘risky’. Finally, the words ‘for support’ have had to be supplied. This accords
with the archaic practice of attaching a gourd at one’s belt when crossing water and
otherwise the lines make little sense.
90. JXFZ/Q, 161.
91. For example, JXFZ/Q, 160 and 166.
92. JXFZ/Q, 148.
93. JXFZ/Q, 160.
94. JXFZ/Q, 154.
95. JXFZ/Q, 149.
96. JXFZ/Q, 158–9.

Notes to pages 189–99

503

97. JXFZ/Q, 159. The term ‘position-power’ used here was applied, as noted earlier, to
mosquitoes pestering livestock. The animals are ‘stronger’ in a crude sense, but the
mosquitoes, who can maneuver better, enjoy superior position-power.
98. The text says ‘fall and summer’, but (1) this is in the wrong order, and (2) heavy rain in
the fall was not usual in Jiaxing, which does not ﬁt well with the phrase ‘every year’ at
the beginning. I have therefore changed ‘fall’ to ‘spring’ here.
99. JXFZ/Q, 159.
100. JXFZ/Q, 144.
101. JXFZ/Q, 146.
102. JXFZ/Q, 146.
103. JXFZ/Q, 161.
104. JXFZ/Q, 122–3.
105. JXFZ/Q, 127.
106. In early-imperial times the zhong ranged from over 6 liters to 37.5 liters, with 20 liters
as a frequent value. See Qiu Guangming, Measures, 248–53.
107. R. B. Marks, “‘It never used to snow’: Climatic variability and harvest yields in lateimperial South China, 1650–1850,” in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time, esp. 435–44.
108. JXFZ/M, 1812–14.
109. Qiu Guangming, Measures, 105.
110. JXFZ/M, 887.
111. JXFZ/M, 807.
112. The Song hu was ﬁxed at 5 dou or half a shi, and so held about 29.25 liters; see Qiu
Guangming, Measures, 262–3. The additional ration per person from the tribute grain
thus worked out at about 12.3 liters of rice per person. Such a quantity might have
lasted for close to a month.
113. JXFZ/M, 831–2.
114. JXFZ/Q, 287.
115. The Yuan-dynasty picul was about 83 liters, and about 1.43 times as large as the Song
picul. See Qiu Guangming, Measures, 263.
116. On this tax in the Southern Song and the system of public lands, see Shiba Yoshinobu,
Economic History of Jiangnan, 72, 90, 152–9, and 254.
117. A device used in Chinese astrology.
118. The term ‘stalagmite’ is strictly speaking inappropriate here, since there was no cave
involved, but we will keep to the term as it is in the Chinese text.
119. JXFZ/Q, 266.
120. ‘Matter–energy–vitality’ is the basic substance of the universe. For a more extended
discussion of the ﬁne ‘germinal causes’ in seventeenth-century thinking, see M. Elvin,
Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif., 1973), 229–32.
121. The usual term for ‘landscape’.
122. JXFZ/Q, 266.
123. JXFZ/Q, 266.
124. JXFZ/M, 859.
125. Probably of Xiushui.
126. The year of the next triennial examinations.
127. Probably some point in the sixteenth century.
128. JXFZ/M, 859, biography of Huang Xianke. The term ‘aether–energies in the human
and physical atmospheres’, literally ‘atmospheric aethers’, most commonly refers to the
human environment in later texts such as this, but its original meanings are physical:
aethers moving through the world to create winds, and climate, for example.

504

Notes to pages 200–8

129.
130.
131.
132.
133.

JXFZ/Q, 149.
JXFZ/M, 791, life of Wang Yu.
JXFZ/M, 1560.
JXFZ/M, 1554.
JXFZ/Q, 141. Note that, as elsewhere in this book, ‘moon’ is used for a month in the
old Chinese lunar calendar. The third moon was most often April and early May.
Occasionally, for the sake of vowel-rhyme in the poems, I have broken this convention
and used ‘month’.
The standard short biography of Xiang describes him as “timid, having few companions, and without a family life or business.” Fang He, et al., eds., Zhongguo renming da
cidian [Large Chinese biographical dictionary] (Taixing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931),
hereafter ZGRMDCD, 1314.
JXFZ/M, 1559–60.
JXFZ/M, 1563.
JXFZ/Q, 155. For Song poems on country markets, see Shiba Yoshinobu, Commerce and
Society in Sung China, translated M. Elvin (Michigan University Center for Chinese
Studies: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1970), 144–5, 147, 149, 151, 152, and 154.
JXFZ/Q, 136.
JXFZ/M, 2192–4.
In Ming times it was assigned to Jiangsu province.
See M. Elvin, Changing Stories in the Chinese World (Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif., 1997), 50, 62, 68–9, 81–2, and 86 for examples. These are mostly translated
from the section in QSD, 564–70 on this subject.
JXFZ/M, 1852–3. The unusual rhyme-scheme is approximately that in the original.
Karlgren, Odes, #174.
JXFZ/M, 1853.
J. Radkau, Natur und Macht: Eine Weltgeschichte der Umwelt (Beck: München, 2000),
126.
JXFZ/M, 2188. The exact mechanism referred to in the last sentence of this passage is
not entirely clear.
Recall that, on average, a Chinese year of age (sui) indicates an exact age one less than
the age in sui.
M. Elvin, Another History: Essays on China from a European Perspective (Wild
Peony/Hawaii University Press: Sydney, 1996), 106–8.
JXFZ/Q, 783.
M. Elvin, “Blood and statistics: Reconstructing the population dynamics of late imperial China from the biographies of virtuous women in local gazetteers,” in H. Zurndorfer, ed., Chinese Women in the Imperial Past: New Perspectives (Brill: Leiden, 1999).
In principle it might be better to use the ‘adult’ expectation of life, that is after some
age like 15, as the data all relate to women above 48.5 years of age, and the adjustment
of a model life table is used (quasi-linearized by means of logits) to extrapolate the
values for the earlier ages by optimizing the match of its corresponding section with
the values of this truncated data distribution.
Others include the yield per unit of area, yield per time-unit of work, and the ratio of
energy in to energy out (excluding sunshine), as well as economic measures based on
the relationship of costs and ﬁnancial returns.
A. Maddalena, “Rural Europe 1500–1750,” vol. II.4 in C. M. Cipolla, ed., The Fontana
Economic History of Europe (1970; reprinted, Collins: Glasgow, 1974), 334–43. The highest
ratio given here for the period before 1750 is 8.7 for Holland and England in 1500–49.

134.

135.
136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
149.
150.

151.
152.

Notes to pages 208–16

505

153. Rice grains have a bran casing which, though nutritious, was commonly removed by
the Chinese by the process of ‘husking’ or ‘hulling’ which was thought to improve the
ﬂavor, and made storage easier.
154. JXFZ/Q, 783–9.
155. JXFZ/Q, 790.
156. See Oki Yasushi, “Feng Menglong ‘Shan'ge’ no kenkyū” [Studies on the ‘Mountain
Ditties’ of Feng Menglong], Tōyō bunka kenkyūjo kiyō 105 (1988).
157. JXFZ/Q, 784. The ﬁrst character of this poem is too defaced to read. I have supplied
‘plum’ as the name of the tree.
158. JXFZ/Q, 789.
159. ZGRMDCD, 1618.
160. JXFZ/Q, 783.
161. JXFZ/Q, 788. Cp. ibid. 784–5. For a detailed analysis of these questions, see Li Bozhong,
“Changes in climate, land, and human efforts: The production of wet-ﬁeld rice in
Jiangnan during the Ming and Qing dynasties,” in Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
162. Wuzhen and Lianshi.
163. JXFZ/Q, 785.
164. JXFZ/Q, 785.
165. Colza is otherwise known as ‘rape’ and its seeds are pressed for oil.
166. Kawakatsu Mamoru, Min-Shin Kōnan nōgyō keizai-shi kenkyū [Researches on the farm
economy of Ming and Qing Jiangnan] (Tōkyō Daigaku shuppankai: Tokyo, 1992), 121.
167. JXFZ/Q, 788.
168. See Kawakatsu Mamoru, Farm Economy of Ming and Qing Jiangnan, 111.
169. Kawakatsu Mamoru, Farm Economy of Ming and Qing Jiangnan, 114.
170. Cited from Shen’s manual in the gazetteer: JXFZ/Q, 790.
171. JXFZ/Q, 793. Also discussed on pp. 169–70.
172. JXFZ/Q, 798–803.
173. JXFZ/Q, 791.
174. For the justiﬁcation of this translation, see Hoshi Ayao, Chūgoku shakai-keizei-shi go-i
[Glossary of terms in China’s social and economic history] (Kindai Chūgoku
kenkyūsentā: Tokyo, 1966), 253.
175. E.g., Pinghu. See JXFZ/Q, 784.
176. JXFZ/Q, 807.
177. Cao Shuji, Qing Period, 102–3 and 470.

8 Chinese Colonialism: Guizhou and the Miao
1. Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu [Series on the natural resources of China] (Zhongguo
ziran ziyuan congshu bianzhuan weiyuanhui, ed. 42 vols., Zhongguo huanjing kexue
chubanshe: Beijing, 1995), hereafter ZZZC (Guizhou volume), 34:408.
2. Jing Daomo, et al., comp., Guizhou tongzhi [Comprehensive gazetteer of Guizhou]
(1741; reprinted, Huawen shuju: Taibei, 1968) hereafter GZTZ, 1:1b; 15:1b.
3. Yan Bao, arra. and annot., Hxak Lul Hxak Ghot: Miaozu guge [Hxak Lul Hxak Ghot:
Ancient songs of the Miao race] (Guizhou minzu chubanshe: Guiyang, 1993), translator’s preface, 1, and the chapter “Yanhe xiqian” [Moving west along the rivers],
651–786. For the background to the process of collection and transcription from which
this book emerged, see the remarks later in the text at the start of the section ‘The Miao’.
4. Ancient Songs of the Miao, 740–3 and 774.

506

Notes to pages 217–23

5. As indicated on p. 485, n. 121, the term ‘in-migrants’ refers to persons changing residence within a political unit. ‘Immigrants’, in contrast, refers to those who cross a
political boundary.
6. There is an overview of these events in H. J. Wiens, Han Chinese Expansion in South
China [originally published as China’s March to the Tropics, 1954; 2nd edn., Shoe String
Press: Hamden, Conn., 1967), esp. 70–93, 187–91, and 234–6.
7. See, for example, GZTZ, 24:14b; 24:23a–27b, etc., on the Yongzheng reign campaigns.
On Miao ﬁrearms, including cannon, see GZTZ, 24:25a; 24:27b, etc.
8. GZTZ, 24:14b.
9. GZTZ, 24:27b.
10. GZTZ, 24:26a.
11. GZTZ, 24:29b.
12. GZTZ, 24:24b, 26b, and 27b.
13. Zhou Zuoji, comp. and rev., Guiyang fuzhi [Guiyang prefectural gazetteer] (Guiyangfu xueshu: Guiyang (?), 1850), hereafter GYFZ, 64:1b.
14. GYFZ, 64:2b.
15. The Chinese term min is deﬁned both as ‘commoners’ in contrast with ‘ofﬁcials’ (guan)
and as ‘civilians ‘ in contrast with ‘soldiers’ (bing). Hence the two-component translation is sometimes appropriate.
16. GYFZ, 64:3a.
17. GYFZ, 50:20ab.
18. GYFZ, 1:4b–5a. His name was Wang Chenglu.
19. A commandery was approximately a prefecture.
20. GYFZ, 44:2b–11a.
21. See Feng Erkang, Yongzheng zhuan [A life of the Yongzheng Emperor] (Taiwan
shangwu: Taibei, 1992), 382–99.
22. GYFZ, 1:1b.
23. GYFZ, 1:2b–3a. To Gao Qizhuo and others.
24. See the map in C. Blunden and M. Elvin, Cultural Atlas of China, rev. edn (Facts on
File: New York, 1998), 36.
25. See Yang Tongsheng, et al., eds., Hxat Khat: Kaiqin ge [Hxat Khat: Songs on the occasion of the formation of alliances through marriage] (Guizhou-sheng minzu yanjiusuo: Guizhou, 1985), introductory remarks.
26. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 34.
27. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 385.
28. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 19.
29. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 12.
30. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 85.
31. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 89.
32. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 344–5.
33. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 315.
34. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 362.
35. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 672.
36. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 640.
37. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 6.
38. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 43.
39. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 1.
40. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 23.
41. Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 35.

Notes to pages 223–37
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

507

Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 48.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 71.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 328.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 322.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 369–70.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 636.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 32.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 36.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 79.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 388.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 635.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 62.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 79.
Yang Tongsheng, Songs on Marriage, 387.
Gu Yingtai, Mingshi jishi benmo [Main themes and details of Ming history recounted]
(1658; reprinted, 4 vols., Shangwu: Taibei, 1956), 2:157–66.
Guiping.
Fifteen kilometers west of Mengshan.
Literally ‘tigers that climb mountains’. This is commonly used for a two-person sedan
chair that can go up hills, but this sense seems inappropriate here.
This a guess at the meaning of ya er ba, the idea being that it is a type of stick, rake, or
handle that gives the climber a second foothold or grip.
Gu Yingtai, Ming History Recounted, 4:60–72. Fang He, et al., eds., Zhongguo renming
da cidian [Large Chinese biographical dictionary] (Taixing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931),
hereafter ZGRMDCD, 242, describes his father An Jiangchen as from a family that had
“lived for generations in Shuixi, and had the direction of the Miao tribes.” See also Tian
Wen, Qian shu [The book of Guizhou], in Yan Ping, ed., Yueya-tang congshu, case 36 in
Baibu congshu jicheng [Collection of collections on all topics] (Qing. Reprinted, Yiwen
yinshuguan: Taibei, 1965–8), 3::10a–12a.
Around what is today Qianxi county. GZTZ, 45:51b–52a.
GZTZ, 45:58a.
GZTZ, 910.
GZTZ, 911.
B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription and Translation (Museum of
Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950), #184.
Since Qian’s pen name was ‘Great Grindstone’ it may also indicate that he saw himself
as the one who corrected others.
T. Bonyhady, “Artists with axes,” Environment and History 1.2 (1995).
GZTZ (Siku quanshu edn.), 572–493, 44:9ab.
GZTZ (Siku quanshu edn.), 572–491, 44:4a.
Probably Nymphoides and Myriophyllum.
GZTZ (Siku quanshu edn.), 572–493, 44:9ab. The identiﬁcation of ‘water-grain’ is
uncertain.
J. Needham, with Wang Ling, Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 3, Mathematics and
the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1959),
538–41.
GYFZ, 24:1a–2a.
Rhetorical exaggeration. The entire prefecture of Guiyang was only about three
hundred kilometers from north to south.

508

Notes to pages 237–45

76. Sic.
77. GYFZ, 40.13a–15b.
78. The text reads ‘Chishui’, but it is explained on the preceding page that the river referred
to is not the river that usually bears this name (which lies to the northwest) but the
Panjiang or Hongshui River.
79. The Chinese term used in the gazetteer is wugui. For a poem describing what this
implied in eastern China, see the fourth of the “Laments on epidemics in the fall” by
Guo Yixiao in Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] (originally
Guochao shiduo, 1869; reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), hereafter QSD, 871.
80. QSD, 883, and “Catalog of the poets’ names, ranks, and writings,” 32. The ‘mediums’
referred to are ‘spirit mediums’. Practitioners of this art, in a wide variety of forms,
were found in most parts of south China, not only among the Miao.
81. See Ji Han, Nanfang caomu zhuang [The forms of the plants and trees of the South]
translated Hui-lin Li, A Fourth Century Flora of Southeast Asia (Chinese University
Press: Hong Kong, 1979), 46–53. Also chapter 4 of the present book, section on ‘The Far
South’.
82. From an eighteenth-century document cited in Wiens, Han Chinese Expansion, 235.
83. GZTZ, 44:28a, 572–503.
84. GZTZ, 11:1a.
85. A misjudgment, perhaps based on the renowned wealth of the Yangzhou salt-merchants?
86. GZTZ, 2:4a.
87. GZTZ, 1:1a–5a.
88. GYFZ, 40:15a.
89. GYFZ, 40:13ab.
90. GYFZ, 40:15ab.
91. Aleurites spp.
92. Quercus acutissima, formerly sinensis.
93. Varieties of Echinochloa crus-galli, a variable plant, often treated as a weed.
94. This is one reason why the ‘early grain’ of the second moon is probably wild oats. The
other is that wild-type oats are known to have been grown in Guizhou, but are not
separately mentioned in this calendar. See GZTZ, 1:1ab.
95. C. A. Lamp, S. J. Forbes, and J. W. Cade, Grasses of Temperate Australia (Inkata Press:
Melbourne, 1990), 144 and 146.
96. GZTZ, 45:38ab.
97. GZTZ, 44:48a.
98. The philosopher–bureaucrat, recorded here by his personal name Wang Shouren. See
p. 228.
99. GZTZ, 45:32a.
100. See R. Lawlor, Voices of the First Day: Awakening in the Aboriginal Dreamtime (Inner
Traditions International: Rochester, Vt, 1991), 373.
101. Yamada Keiji, “Sōdai no shizen tetsugaku: Sōgaku ni okeru no ichi ni tsuite” [The
Song philosophy of nature: Its place in Song learning], in Yabuuchi Kiyoshi, ed., SōGen jidai kagaku gijutsu [Science and technology in the Song and Yuan period]
(Jimbun kagaku kenkyūjo (Kyoto, 1967), 47–8. The interchange is actually illusory, as
explained later.
102. Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 64, 4::2:2a–3a. The text is not easy to translate, and my
suggested reading differs in places from that made earlier by Claudine LombardSalmon of parts of it. See Claudine Lombard-Salmon, Un Exemple d’acculturation
chinoise: La province de Guizhou (École française d’Extrême-Orient: Paris, 1972), 190.
103. Literally, ‘skies’ or ‘daylight’.

Notes to pages 245–62

509

104. This is a reference to the ‘Wai wu’ chapter of the Zhuangzi, which talks of “using
a metal hammer to tap on his chin.” See Guo Qingfan, ed., Zhuangzi jishi [The
Zhuangzi, with collected explanations] (Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1961), hereafter
ZZJS, 928.
105. This rendering is a guess. Deer tended to be associated with the dawn. Thus in the ﬁrst
of Du Fu’s poems to Hermit Zhang, he says “You feel no need for the nightly knowledge of aethers of silver and gold. / All thoughts of killing set aside, you watch the deer
roam in the dawn.” See Chou Zhao'ao, ed., Du Shaoling ji xiangzhu [Du Fu’s collected
works with detailed notes] (4 vols., Wenxue guji kanxingshe: Beijing, 1955), 2:1:5, “Ti
Zhang-shi yinju er shou.”
106. Literally, ‘a dry mouth’. This and the other technical terms that follow are plausible
guesses that ﬁt the context.
107. GYTZ, 44:11b–13b.
108. The ﬁrst of the two You mountains is in Hu'nan (the lesser of the two) and the second
in Sichuan (the greater).
109. J. V. Roddricks, Calculated Risks. The Toxicity and Human Health Risks of Chemicals in
our Environment (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1992), 98.
110. A quotation from the Scripture of Songs. See Karlgren, Odes, #154.
111. Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 4::4:5ab.
112. Georgius Agricola [G. Bauer], De Re Metallica (1556, translated and edited by H. C. and
L. H. Hoover, 1912; reprinted, Dover: New York, 1950), notably the methods described
on 430–2.
113. I owe these explanations to Dr Ian Williams of the Research School of Earth Sciences,
Australian National University, and would like to express my thanks for his help.
114. Xie Zhaozhe, Wu zazu [Fivefold miscellany] (1608; reprinted under the supervision of
Li Weizhen, Xinxing shuju: Taibei, 1971), hereafter WZZ, 952–3.
115. QSD, 929.
116. Yang Shen.
117. GZTZ, 44:44ab.
118. He gave his name to a town near modern Zhenxiong, just across the Guizhou border
in Yunnan.
119. Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 11:12a–13b.
120. In the seventeenth century.
121. Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 11:13b–14b.
122. Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 11:15b.
123. GZTZ, 45:51a.
124. Tian Wen Book of Guizhou, 11:15ab. The date of the attack is unclear.
125. GZTZ, 45:11b.
126. GZTZ, 45:46b.
127. GZTZ, 45:32a. Note that in the pinyin system of transcription the place-name ‘Shiqian’
is pronounced something like ‘Shurr-chyenn’, with the stress on the last syllable.
128. GZTZ, 45:54b–55a.
129. By Xie Sanxiu. GZTZ, 44:32b.
130. E. Zürcher, The Buddhist Conquest of China (Brill: Leiden, 1959), 131–2.
131. GZTZ, 44:58a–59b. Cp. p. 239 above.
132. The ‘hump-backed ox’ was a zebu (Bos indicus), also found in India and parts of east
Africa. It has spectacular high curling horns. The ‘red seals’ may perhaps have indicated
that the slogans had ofﬁcial permission, but this suggestion is only a guess. The ‘Heavenly Magical Dancers’ were a troupe formed at Court toward the close of the Mongol
dynasty in the middle of the fourteenth century. Their inspiration was reputedly a histor-

510

133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.

155.
156.
157.
158.

Notes to pages 262–73
ical record of Tang-dynasty dance music of the same name. The ‘love-capers in moonlight’ refer to the dances held on moonlit nights during the springtime by young unmarried Miao men and women, after which marriages were arranged. The Chinese were
intrigued by this custom and left numerous accounts of what was believed to go on.
Dali-zhou Wenlian [Literary Association of Dali {Yunnan}], Dali gu yishu chao [Transcriptions of ancient lost books from Dali] (Yunnan Renmin Chubanshe: Kunming,
2001), 162 and 437.
Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 4::4:24b–25a.
Zhang.
At 26° N, 100° 45´ E, and southwest of Guiyang.
In full, Euphorbia chrysocoma Levl. and Vant. Personal communication of 7 January
1999, from the Musée National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris.
GZTZ, 45:35b–36a.
In what is today Zhenning county.
GZTZ, 45:34ab. Note that I have supplied the ‘now’.
GZTZ, 44:59ab.
GZTZ, 45:36b–37a.
Li Jingshan.
GZTZ, 45:30b–31a.
GZTZ, 46:4b–5a.
Near the modern Dejiang county.
GZTZ, 46:6a–7a.
Tian Wen, Book of Guizhou, 2:27b–28b.
GZTZ, 44:59b–60a.
GZTZ, 45:12b.
GZTZ, 45:12a.
Ding Yanghao. GZTZ, 45:44b.
A line not translated in the text speciﬁes that the piece refers to Guizhou.
See for example Zhang Yigu’s “Going from Slantbridge to Zhenyuan,” the latter place
being rather more than thirty kilometers downriver to the east. The author was an
ofﬁcial, skilled in painting and composing verses, who ﬂourished in the second half of
the seventeenth century. GZTZ, 44:44ab.
GZTZ, 44:60a–61a.
GZTZ, 45:8b–9a.
At about 22° 45´ N, 109° 15´ E, in Heng county.
GZTZ, 45:41b.

9 The Riddle of Longevity: Why Zunhua?
1. M. Elvin, “Blood and statistics: Reconstructing the population dynamics of late imperial China from the biographies of virtuous women in local gazetteers,” in H. Zurndorfer, ed., Chinese Women in the Imperial Past: New Perspectives (Brill: Leiden, 1999).
2. P. R. Katz, Demon Hordes and Burning Boats: The Cult of Marshal Wen in Late Imperial
Chekiang (State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y., 1995).
3. He Songtai et al., eds., Zunhua tongzhi [Zunhua department comprehensive gazetteer]
(no publisher stated) hereafter ZHTZ, 25: sidian 3ab. Microﬁlm courtesy of Columbia
University Library, to whom I would like to express my thanks. For another reference
to ‘epidemics’ see page 314 below.

Notes to pages 274–82

511

4. Cao Shuji, Qing shiqi [The Qing period], vol. 5 of Ge Jianxiong, ed., Zhongguo renkou
shi [History of China’s population series], (Fudan daxue chubanshe: Shanghai, 2001),
335–6. This yields a growth rate of 0.28 per cent per year in the nineteenth century.
5. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 14a.
6. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 15a.
7. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 13a.
8. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 14b.
9. See J. Chen, T. C. Campbell, J. Li, and R. Peto, Diet, Life-style and Mortality in China: A
Study of the Characteristics of 65 Chinese Counties (Oxford University Press, Cornell
University Press, and People’s Medical Publishing House: Oxford, 1990).
10. M. Cohen, Health and the Rise of Civilization (Yale University Press: New Haven,
Conn., 1989), and A. Macfarlane, The Savage Wars of Peace (Blackwell: Oxford, 1997).
11. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, huobu 40b.
12. The information on modern Zunhua in the pages that follow is mainly taken from
Zunhua xianzhi bianzuan weiyuanhui, ed., Zunhua xianzhi [Zunhua county gazetteer]
(Hebei renming chubanshe: Shijiazhuang, 1990), hereafter ZHXZ.
13. ZHTZ, 43:2b.
14. ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 21a.
15. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi shi [A history of the Xianbi] (Bowen shuju: Hong Kong, 1973), 13–14.
16. ZHTZ, 16: chengchi 2ab.
17. From the third century bce to the early ﬁfth ce.
18. In the northwest of modern Zunhua.
19. Present Yutian.
20. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 35–6.
21. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 332.
22. Examples in Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 77, 145, 161, etc.
23. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 87.
24. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 80–1.
25. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 201–2.
26. Quoted in Chen Shu, Qidan shehui jingji shigao [Draft history of the society and
economy of the Qidan] (Sanlian: Beijing, 1963), 7.
27. Jin Weixian, Qidan-de Dongbei zhengce [The administrative policies of the Qidan in
Manchuria] (Huashi chubanshe: Taibei, 1981), 9.
28. Lin Lüzhi, Xianbi, 361–4.
29. To make sense out of the ﬁrst line of the second verse, I have had to emend chéng =
‘city’ to chéng = ‘complete’, but there is no certainty that this is right. It is also not
entirely consistent with the tone of the rest of the song to have a moment of exhilaration such as this seems to be.
30. Qin River (Qinchuan) is a part of the Qingshui River in northwestern Shaanxi. It
empties into the upper Wei.
31. ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 4a.
32. The account that follows is based mostly on Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan,
with additional information from Jin Weixian, Administrative Policies of the Qidan.
33. Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 17–20.
34. Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 70.
35. Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 30–1.
36. Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 70.
37. The chessboard referred to here refers to weiqi, ‘surrounding chess’ or go, which is
played on the 361 intersections of the lines, not in the squares between them.

512
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.

Notes to pages 282–98
From Wang Ceng.
Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 106.
Jin Weixian, Administrative Policies of the Qidan, 68.
Jin Weixian, Administrative Policies of the Qidan, 11.
Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 36.
ZHTZ, 47: jinshi, beike 2a–3a, and Chen Shu, Society and Economy of the Qidan, 73–4.
ZHTZ, 43: guji, gongyuan 4ab.
Most likely the consort of Emperor Shengzong, who ruled from 983 to 1030. The
carriage in which she was conveyed was famous for having a dragon’s head and a kite’s
tail. It was decorated with gold, and when she traveled through the mountain valleys
during the summer and fall, the carriage hangings seemed to be interwoven with the
tapestry-like ﬂowers and trees, so that, it was said, those who descried her in the
distance thought she must be a goddess. There were, however, two other Qidan
empresses who had this name. See Fang He, et al., eds., Zhongguo renming da cidian
[Large Chinese biographical dictionary] (Taixing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931), hereafter
ZGRMDCD, 1645.
Both of these were historical places in northwestern China famous in Qin and Han
times.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 4b.
Or possibly, according to one theory, ‘metal’, since metal cuts wood, the dominant
element adopted by the Qidan. Jin Weixian, Administrative Policies of the Qidan, 137.
There might be a covert war of symbols here.
The shayuan.
Xie Zhaozhe, Wu zazu [Fivefold miscellany] (1608; reprinted, Xinxing shuju: Taibei,
1971), hereafter WZZ, 716.
ZHTZ, 16: jianzhi, shijie 9a.
North of the Wall.
ZHTZ, 43:1a.
ZHTZ, 43:1a.
ZHTZ, 43: guiji, Zunhua shijing 22a.
Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu bianzhuan weiyuanhui, ed., Zhongguo ziran ziyuan
congshu [Series on the natural resources of China] (Zhongguo huanjing kexue
chubanshe: Beijing, 1995), hereafter ZGZRZYCS, 14: Hebei volume, 348.
For these points and what follows, see ZHTZ, 1:1a–12b.
ZHTZ, 5: lingqin, chenhan 3ab.
ZHTZ, 6: lingqin, chenhan 1a.
ZHTZ, 6: lingqin, chenhan 2b.
ZHTZ, 7: qinling, jinling 13a–14b.
ZHTZ, 2: qinling, xiangrui 4a–7b.
ZHTZ, 16: chengchi 1ab and 2b.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 1b–2a.
ZHTZ, 16: shujie 3a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 1b.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 2a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, mupu 25a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, mupu 27a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, mupu 25a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, gushu 1b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 16b.

Notes to pages 298–306
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.

85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.

513

ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 23b (Shuangcheng he) and 24b (Lanquan).
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, gushu 1b.
ZHTZ 15, yudi, fengsu 3a.
By late-imperial times the term ye you used here normally meant ‘to frequent brothels’,
which is clearly inappropriate in this context, so I have gone back to its ancient
meaning of an amatory ramble by a girl.
The term ji-zhou used here normally means ‘dustpan and broom’, and more generally
‘a wife’. It makes no sense in the present context, so I have based my speculative reading
here on the original sense of ji, a ‘winnowing basket’.
ZHTZ, 55: lienü zhuan 8a (Zhang-shi).
ZHTZ, 15: yudi wuchan 3b.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi fengsu 3a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi wuchan 14a.
ZHTZ, 55, lienü zhuan 2a, 12b and 56.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 2ab.
Not the usual sense for po wu. H. Giles, A Chinese–English Dictionary, 2nd edn (1912;
reprinted, Jingwen shuju: Tabei, 1964), 1143, gives “the 5th of the 1st moon—the end of
the holidays” for po wu ri/er. The analogy on which my translation rests is po ri, an
unlucky day.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 9b.
From context, probably a deity.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 11a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 11a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 12ab.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 12b–13a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 14a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 14a.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, fengsu 11b.
ZHTZ, 15: shoushu, no pagination.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 13a.
ZHTZ, 13, yudi, shanchuan 13a and 14a. The ﬁrst of these two poems comments that in
years past the water in the Myriad Measures Spring had dried up, but was now ﬂowing
again. Not every source was perennial.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 21b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 18b.
I have glossed ‘limestone’ for ‘stone’, because that is what would have been needed for
plaster or whitewash. Min is often translated as ‘alabaster’ and this compact form of
gypsum is well suited to carving, but the color is usually close to white, which does not
ﬁt with the ‘blue-green’ in the text of the poem.
ZHTZ, 13: shanchuan, Fengrun, page number illegible.
ZHTZ, 13: shanchuan, Yutian 23ab.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 23b–24b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 18a.
Literally, ‘lively’.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 14b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 15a.
ZHTZ, 43: guiji, Zunhua shijing 24b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 12b.
ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 14a.

514

Notes to pages 307–11

110. ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan 16ab, and 43: guiji, Zunhua shijing 24b–25a.
111. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 1a. Li Shizhen in fact gave his source as “it is also said
that,” indicating hearsay. The wording is somewhat different and the observation is not
speciﬁcally linked to the eating of humans as it is in the gazetteer. See Li Shizhen,
Bencao gangmu [Pharmacopeia arranged by headings and subheadings] (1596:
reprinted, Shangwu yinshuguan: Shanghai, 1930), vol. 5, 51:3.
112. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 1a. It is possible that the birds referred to here were
falcons, but their large size suggests eagles.
113. In the WZZ of 1608, 736–7, we ﬁnd the following: “Those who train falcons [or
‘eagles’] ﬁrst seel the bird’s eyes by sewing them up, and then hood it with a bag. They
next shut it in an empty room with a man made of straw to provide it with a forearm.
To begin with the bird leaps about in a rage, striking out in frenzy, and is unwilling
to perch here. Only after some time, when it is exhausted, will it alight on the
forearm. Once the trainer reckons that it is extremely hungry, he will lure it with a
morsel of meat, but not at ﬁrst let it eat its ﬁll. After some tens of days the seeled eyes
will open, and he will then tie its wings together and remove the hood. When the
hood is taken off, the bird strikes out in anger just as before, but once again becomes
exhausted and docile. At this point a man will provide it with a forearm in place of
[the straw dummy]. This takes about forty-nine days. The door is then opened and
the bird is released to soar aloft for a while. The other birds will all be in hiding and
it will secure nothing to eat. At this point the trainer makes an imitation pheasant out
of bamboo, puts some meat in it, and places it half-hidden and half-exposed in the
grass. When the falcon sees the bamboo pheasant it seizes it violently. The trainer
then slowly draws in its braided silk leash. After accustoming it to this for a long time,
the trainer can go out hunting with the bird, which will capture prey and release it
exactly as he wishes.”
114. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 1a.
115. ZGZRZYCS, 14: Hebei, 10.
116. ZGZRZYCS, 14: Hebei 67–8, 69, 71–2, 127, 147, etc.
117. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 1b.
118. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 1b.
119. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 2a.
120. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou 2a.
121. ZHTZ, 15 yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination.
122. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination.
123. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination.
124. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination.
125. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination, but on the page following that for
the preceding reference.
126. ZHTZ, 13: yudi, shanchuan Fengrun 27a.
127. ZHTZ, 13: yudi, jiangyu 7b. I have used ‘Immanent Pattern’ for the Dao or ‘Way’.
128. ZHTZ, 15: wuchan, shoubu 1a.
129. ZHTZ, 14: yudi, guanyi 3a. I have replaced the phrase ‘lift up my skirts’ in the original
with ‘throw back my cloak’, because the former is a conventional phrase inherited from
archaic times before Chinese men rode on horses and had to change to wearing
trousers to do so. The underlying sense is to ready one’s dress in a determined fashion
for wading across water or striding forward on a journey.
130. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, pagination illegible.
131. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu 1ab.

Notes to pages 311–26

515

132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.

ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, pagination illegible.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, pagination illegible.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, no pagination.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, qinshou, no pagination.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, no pagination.
ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, shoubu, no pagination.
The items in this section are all taken from ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan 7b–11b; luobu
11b–13b; and guobu 29b–34a, unless otherwise indicated.
139. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan, mubu 27a, 28b, and 29b.
140. ZHTZ, 15: yudi, wuchan 6a.
141. Speciﬁc data on the nutritional values of foods in the paragraphs that follow are taken
from B. Fox and A. Cameron, Food Science, Nutrition and Health, 6th edn. (Arnold:
London, 1997), and J. Garrow and W. James, eds., Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 9th
edn. (Churchill Livingstone: Edinburgh, 1998). General points on nutrition in China
are based on Campbell in Chen, Campbell, Li, and Peto, Diet, Life-style and Mortality
in China, 47, 55, 59, and 62.

10 Nature as Revelation
1. H. Delahaye, Les Premières Peintures de paysage en Chine: Aspects religieux (École
française d’Extrême-Orient: Paris, 1981), 81.
2. Obi Kōichi, Chūgoku bungaku ni aratawareta shizen to shizenkan [Nature and the
concept of nature in Chinese literature] (Iwanami shoten: Tokyo, 1963), 205–6.
3. Reading qin ‘akin’ for xin ‘new’.
4. H. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China: Zum Subjekt–Objekt–Gegensatz in der
klassischen chinesischen Philosophie: Zugleich eine Kritik des Klischees vom chinesischen
Universismus (Lang: Frankfurt am Main, 1984).
5. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China, 85. My italics.
6. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China, 82.
7. Roetz, Mensch und Natur im alten China, 83.
8. As by Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature.
9. Convenient translations are A. Waley, The Book of Songs (Allen and Unwin: London,
1937), and B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription, and Translation
(Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950). The latter has the Chinese text
as well. References below are to the Karlgren, with his numbering of the pieces.
10. Karlgren, Odes, #181.
11. Karlgren, Odes, #121.
12. Karlgren, Odes, #14.
13. Karlgren, Odes, #66.
14. Karglren, Odes, #165.
15. Karlgren, Odes, #112.
16. Karlgren, Odes, #65.
17. Karlgren, Odes, #167.
18. Karlgren, Odes, #194.
19. Karlgren, Odes, #258.
20. An eloquent translation is D. Hawkes, Ch’u Tz’u: The Songs of the South (Clarendon
Press: Oxford, 1959; revised edition, Penguin: London, 1985).
21. The question of authorship being a vexed one but irrelevant for our purposes.

516

Notes to pages 326–42

22. Ma Maoyuan, ed., Chuci xuanzhu [The Songs of the South, with selected notes] (Xinyue
chubanshe: Hong Kong, 1962), hereafter CCXZ, 105.
23. CCXZ, 128.
24. CCXZ, 177. I follow Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 18, in reading fuyuan
in the ﬁrst line of the second quatrain, rather than Ma’s fuliang.
25. Shirakawa Tadahisa, Tō Enmei to sono jidai [Tao Yuanming and his age] (Kembun
shuppan: Tokyo, 1994), 325–7.
26. CCXZ, 95.
27. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 34–5; Xiao Tong, comp., Li Shan, annot.,
Wenxuan [The Chinese anthology] (sixth century, 1181 edn.; reprinted, 4 cases,
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1974), hereafter WX, j. 34.
28. WX, 12:1a–8b, and Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 241–2.
29. J. Brown, et al., Waves, Tides and Shallow-Water Processes, (rev. edn. (Pergamon:
Oxford, 1991), 32–4.
30. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 50.
31. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 50.
32. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 247.
33. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 188.
34. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 294.
35. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 291.
36. Obi, Concepts of Nature in Chinese Literature, 293.
37. For detailed analyses of these and related questions, see Shirakawa Tadahisa, Tao
Yuanming, 150–64.
38. The following paragraphs are based on Shirakawa Tadahisa, Tao Yuanming, naihen
section.
39. I have used the text in the anthology Quan shanggu sandai Qin-Han liuchao wen
[Complete literature from high antiquity, the Three Dynasties, the Qin and Han, and
the Six Dynasties] (Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1965), hereafter QW, Song, “Xie Kangle
jixuan,” fu, 1a–11b. Variant readings from Gu Shaobo and Wang Honglu, Xie Lingyunji jiaozhu [The works of Xie Lingyun with variant readings and notes] (Zhongzhou
guji chubanshe: n.p. [He'nan], 1987), 318–76, have also been consulted. A number
of references have also been identiﬁed from the invaluable J. D. Frodsham,
The Murmuring Stream: The Life and Works of the Chinese Nature Poet Hsieh Lingyün (385–433), Duke of K’ang-Lo (2 vols., University of Malaya Press: Kuala Lumpur,
1967).
40. Chen Qiaoyi, “Gudai Shaoxing diqu tianran senlin-de pohuai ji qi dui nongye-de
yingxiang” [The destruction in ancient times of the natural forests of Shaoxing and its
impact on agriculture], Dili xuebao 31.2 (June 1965), 130 and 135.
41. F. A. Westbrook, “Landscape description in the lyric poetry and ‘Fuh on Dwelling on
the Mountains’ of Shieh Ling-yunn” (Ph.D. thesis, Yale University, 1972), 222.
42. Westbrook, “Landscape description”, 236.
43. Westbrook, “Landscape description”, 235.
44. I should like to express my thanks to Chiang Yang-ming (Sam Rivers) of Canberra for
his scholarly care in checking doubtful points. Where, from time to time, I have
differed from his interpretations, I am doubly conscious of the risk that I have taken.
45. Shirakawa Tadahisa, Tao Yuanming, 268–75.
46. Shirakawa Tadahisa, Tao Yuanming, 506–7, gives an extensive genealogy of the Xie family,
which included several other poets besides Lingyun, both in earlier and later generations.
47. Frodsham, The Murmuring Stream, II:103.

Notes to pages 343–60

517

48. On the geographical history of this area, see M. Elvin and N. Su, “Man against the sea:
Natural and anthropogenic factors in the changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay,
circa 1000–1800,” Environment and History 1.1 (Feb. 1995).
49. M. Elvin and Su Ninghu, “Engineering the sea: Hydraulic systems and pre-modern
technological lock-in in the Harngzhou Bay area circa 1000–1800,” in Itō Suntarō and
Yoshida Yoshinori, eds., Nature and Humankind in the Age of Environmental Crisis
(International Research Center for Japanese Studies: Kyoto, 1995).
50. Following the spirit of the suggestion of Professor Nathan Sivin that the term jieqi be
rendered ‘qi-nodes’ or ‘nodes of the year’.
51. Karlgren, Odes, #203. Karlgren renders jiang ‘rice-water’ as ‘congee’ here, which is riceporridge. S. Couvreur, Dictionnaire classique de la langue chinoise (Imprimerie de la
Mission catholique: Hejian fu, 1911), 536, has “eau de riz,” and B. Karlgren, Grammata
Serica Recensa (Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1957), 192, “rice-water,
drink.” These ﬁt better with Xie’s explicit categorization of it as a drink.
52. Guo Qingfan, ed., Zhuangzi jishi [The Zhuangzi, with collected explanations]
(Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1961), hereafter ZZJS, “Xiaoyao you,” 24.
53. Fang He, et al., eds., Zhongguo renming da cidian [Large Chinese biographical
dictionary] (Taxing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931), hereafter ZGRMDCD, 143.
54. Translating as ‘orchids’ the term lan is misleading. Lan include the Orchidaceae, in
modern Chinese the lanke, and most especially the Cymbidium group, but also all sorts
of other ﬂowers that are not true orchids at all. Roughly, proper orchids have ﬂowers
with three sepals and three petals, one of these latter usually being larger than the
others, and also a distinctive bisexual reproductive organ, the ‘column’. Given the waterside location, the lan referred to here are probably bog-orchids of the genus Arethusa.
55. Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu bianzhuan weiyuanhui, ed., Zhongguo ziran ziyuan
congshu [Series on the natural resources of China] (Zhongguo huanjing kexue
chubanshe: Beijing, 1995), hereafter ZGZRZYCS, Zhejiang juan, 229, 232, and 246.
56. ZGZRZYCS, Zhejiang juan, 305.
57. Sha sounds the same as the word for ‘sand’.
58. Those for the kun and xiang.
59. S. Leys [P. Ryckmans], The Analects of Confucius (Norton: New York, 1997), 48 and 168.
60. ZGZRZYCS, Zhejiang juan, 324.
61. Xie’s own note to the text.
62. The wording given by Xie is not quite exact. See ZZJS, 14, “Tian yun.”
63. Actually the Liezi. See Liezi xuanji sanzhong [Three selected versions of the Liezi] in
Xiao Tianshi, gen. ed., Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng 64 (Zhongguo zixue mingzhu
jicheng bianyin jijinhui: Taibei, 1978), hereafter LZXJSZ, 2:Huangdi 61, 327, and 609.
My thanks to Dr Steve Bogenkamp for pointing this out. It should also be noted that
the fable in the Liezi is in the past tense, about a man who lived beside the sea and
“loved seagulls.” The reference to ‘contriving’ appears only in the notes to one edition
of the three I have looked at, LZXJSZ, 327. If the sage is without conscious intent, the
birds and animals regard him as a companion.
64. I have added ‘sandstone’ to ‘arrow-barbs’ on the base of a roughly contemporary
source (Cihai [encyclopedia] (Zhonghua shuju: Shanghai, 1947), 974: ‘pan’). The ‘tethered arrows’ were shafts with a long thread attached to them so they could be recovered after they had been shot. This ancient usage may or may not have still been
current in Xie’s day. No inference should therefore be made about hunting technology
at this time. The tiao is a literary ﬁsh, referred to in the Scripture of Songs (Karlgren,
Odes, #281), and without an identiﬁable modern equivalent. The reading of ‘what is

518

Notes to pages 360–73

not distant’ in the second line of the last verse as ‘the Way’ is inferred from the cliché
‘the Way is not distant from human beings’ in the scriptural Doctrine of the Mean.
65. See F. Cook, Hua-yen Buddhism (Pennsylvania State University Press: University Park,
Penn., 1977), 110–22.
66. Karlgren, Odes, #153.
67. Karlgren, Odes, #207.

11 Science and Superfauna
1. Xie Zhaozhe,Wu zazu [Fivefold miscellany] (1608: reprinted under the supervision of
Li Weizhen, Xinxing shuju: Taibei, 1971), hereafter WZZ. References are to this
facsimile reprint of the original 1608 edition, using the modern page numbers.
2. This refers to the Chinese aquatic species, whose particular power is to bring or to
withhold rain, not the Western species of dragon, who is associated with ﬁre, and
whose habitat is usually a mountain cave rather than the deep pool or the depths of
the ocean frequented by his Chinese counterpart.
3. Wang Chong, Lun heng jiaoshi [Wang Chong’s ‘Discourses weighed in the balance’,
corrected and explained] (Han dynasty: 4 vols., Huang Hui, ed., Shangwu yinshuguan:
Taibei, 1964), hereafter LHJS.
4. Shen Gua, ed., Mengqi bitan [Jottings from {the garden of} the brook of dreams] (Song
dynasty; Hu Daojing, ed., as Xinjiaozheng ‘Mengqi bitan’, (Zhonghua shuju: Hong
Kong, 1975), cited as MQBT, with modern page numbers. J. F. Billeter, et al., “Florilège
des Notes du Ruisseau des Rêves (Mengqi bitan) de Shen Gua (1031–1095),” Études Asiatiques XLVII.3 (1993), offer the most balanced exegesis of Shen’s style of thought
presently available.
5. LHJS, 136–43.
6. As noted on p. 493, n. 42, ‘position-power’ (shì) is contrasted with ‘strength’ (lì) on
page 145 of LHJS. Wang Chong notes that cattle and horses have greater ‘strength’ but
inferior ‘position-power’ as compared to the mosquitoes that pester them.
7. J. C., Brenier, J. P. Diény, J.-C. Martzloff, and W. de Wieclawik, “Shen Gua (1031–1095)
et les sciences,” Revue d’histoire des sciences XLII.4 (1989), 339–40, ask, of recent scholarship on Shen, “how is it that such a work, which by its style, its structure, and its
eclecticism evidently seems to be allied to general literature, has been associated with
the sciences?”
8. MQBT, 209.
9. MQBT, 197 et seq.
10. MQBT, 83. M. Kalinowski, “Le Calcul du rayon céleste dans la cosmographie chinoise,”
Revue d’histoire des sciences XLIII.1 (1990), 32, suggests that “the Chinese cosmographers built their theories on the basis of an image of the world that they drew from
their instrumental models. Sky charts, celestial globes, and armillary sphere seemed to
them to be miniaturized reproductions of the cosmos.”
11. MQBT, 237.
12. MQBT, 249.
13. MQBT, 238.
14. MQBT, 198. The word translated as ‘random’ here is màn, which has the sense of ‘at
will’, ‘in uncontrolled fashion’. Recall that go is ‘Chinese surrounding chess’, played with
black and white counters on a board 19 by 19 in size.
15. Brenier, et al., “Shen Gua et les sciences,” 347–8 and 350, argue that Shen’s “science” is

Notes to pages 373–80

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

519

“wholly directed toward effective action,” and is “indifferent to the search for truth in
and of itself.”
MQBT, 38.
MQBT, 81.
MQBT, 78–9.
Duan Chengshi, Youyang zazu [Miscellany from Youyang] (Tang dynasty; reprinted in
the Wenyuan edition of the Qinding Siku quanshu, vol. 1047, Shangwu yinshu-guan:
Taibei, 1983), 637–768 and 769–835.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 639.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 666.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 669.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 688.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 742.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 760. On this see also the last part of the
section ‘Humankind’ in the present chapter.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 737.
Duan Chengshi, Miscellany from Youyang, 643–4.
Fang He, et al., eds., Zhongguo renming da cidian [Large Chinese biographical
dictionary] (Taixing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931), hereafter ZGRMDCD, 1056.
WZZ, 389, 766, 381, and 258–9, respectively.
The book has sometimes been drawn on as a source for social and economic history,
as by the Fujian historian Fu Yiling. See his Ming-Qing nongcun shehui jingji [The
social economy of villages in Ming and Qing times] (Sanlian: Beijing, 1961), 155–6, or
his Mingdai Jiangnan shimin jingji shitan [Essay on the urban economy of Jiangnan in
Ming times] (Shanghai renmin: Shanghai, 1963), 44, footnote 94.
WZZ, 14–15.
WZZ, 160–1. Even in the mid-eighteenth century certain English scientists were
intrigued by such phenomena as ‘ﬁre set alight by water or ice’. See G. Bachelard, La
Formation de l’esprit scientiﬁque, 3rd edn (Vrin: Paris, 1957), 35.
WZZ, 1116–17.
WZZ, 1103–4.
WZZ, 1080–1.
WZZ, 21.
WZZ, 30.
Compiled in the ﬁrst century ce.
WZZ, 51.
WZZ, 74.
WZZ, 397.
Compiled late in the tenth century by Li Fang and his collaborators.
WZZ, 317–18.
See chapter 4, pages 66 and 68‒9.
WZZ, 360–1.
WZZ, 272.
Francis Bacon testiﬁed from his personal experience that warts could be cured by an
application of bacon fat which was then removed, and allowed to rot, a process that
took about seven months. See Bachelard, L’Esprit scientiﬁque, 146.
WZZ, 127.
WZZ, 11–12.
WZZ, 13.

520

Notes to pages 380–7

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.

WZZ, 1059–60.
WZZ, 810–11.
WZZ, 155–6.
Facial expression, words, vision, hearing, and thought.
WZZ, 14.
WZZ, 709.
WZZ, 14–15.
WZZ, 13.
WZZ, 301–2.
WZZ, 304–5.
WZZ, 719.
WZZ, 741–2.
WZZ, 769.
WZZ, 773.
WZZ, 14.
WZZ, 780.
Literally, ‘seeds’.
Elsewhere (WZZ, 161–2) Xie talks about the different ﬁxities with which the different
phases of matter ‘received a form’, water having the ‘subtlest form’ and losing it most
swiftly, earth being the ‘heaviest’ and its form ‘never gnawed away’. He gives no general
discussion of forms or conﬁgurations.
WZZ, 783. Gaston Bachelard quotes the view expressed in an eighteenth-century letter
that ‘electricity’ would be better called ‘vivacity’. The writer went on: “We generally see
that youth has much more of what we call ﬁre and vivacity than old age . . . . Now, if
animal life is to be ascribed to the same cause as electric ﬁre, it will no longer be difﬁcult
to imagine the reason for the danger in having old people sleep together with children:
since an old body contains much less of this ﬁre than a young one, it is not surprising
that it attracts some of this from the latter toward itself, the young body thereby losing
its natural force and falling into a state of languor, as experience has always proven to
be the case with infants.” Retranslated from Bachelard, L’Esprit scientiﬁque, 154.
WZZ, 714.
WZZ, 515.
WZZ, 801 and 820.
WZZ, 874.
WZZ, 859.
WZZ, 666–7.
WZZ, 226–7. Acquired immunity to micro-organisms?
WZZ, 297–8.
WZZ, 56.
WZZ, 692–3.
WZZ, 694.
Near Ningbo in the Southeast.
WZZ, 694.
WZZ, 696.
WZZ, 697.
WZZ, 693. A quite different view is discussed in the next chapter.
WZZ, 696.
WZZ, 692.
WZZ, 716.
WZZ, 719.

69.

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

Notes to pages 387–97
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.

521

WZZ, 732–3.
WZZ, 735. Phalacrocorax capillatus is not vivaparous.
WZZ, 776.
WZZ, 788.
B. Shapiro, Probability and Certainty in Seventeenth-Century England: A Study of the
Relationships between Natural Science, Religion, History, Law, and Literature (Princeton
University Press: Princeton, N.J., 1983).
Nakayama Shigeru, Academic and Scientiﬁc Traditions in China, Japan, and the West
(1974), translated J. Dusenbury (University of Tokyo Press: Tokyo, 1984), esp. chapter 4.
N. Elias, The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners (1939), translated E. Jephcott
(Blackwell: Oxford, 1978, rev. edn 1994, 2 vols.), I, esp. chapter 2.
B. A. Elman, From Philosophy to Philology: Intellectual and Social Aspects of Change in
Late Imperial China (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1984).
A. C. Crombie, Styles of Scientiﬁc Thinking in the European Tradition (3 vols., Duckworth: London, 1994), II:811, 829, 851, 948–9, 956, and 988–9.
WZZ, 68–9.
WZZ, 76–7.
WZZ, 65.
WZZ, 66.
See WZZ, 67 for an example.
WZZ, 857.
WZZ, 837.
WZZ, 818–19.
WZZ, 940.
WZZ, 1013.
WZZ, 848.
In the Chinese imperially promulgated lunar calendar.
WZZ, 849.
WZZ, 714–15.
WZZ, 83.
WZZ, 222–3.
WZZ, 386–7.
In fact by an insufﬁciency of iodine.
Modern Guangdong and Guangxi.
WZZ, 287.
WZZ, 297–8.
WZZ, 234–5.
In Shandong province.
WZZ, 230.
WZZ, 230.
WZZ, 277–8.
WZZ, 415–16.
WZZ, 421–2.
WZZ, 146.
WZZ, 277.
In Shandong.
See Elman, Philosophy to Philology, 212–21.
The Bencao gangmu. Georges Métailié, “Histoire naturelle et humanisme en Chine et
en Europe au XVIe siècle: Li Shizhen et Jaques Dalechamp,” Revue d’histoire des sciences
XLIII.1 (1990), 353–74, describes the use of various classiﬁcatory criteria by Li, such as

522

132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.
155.
156.
157.
158.

159.
160.
161.
162.

163.
164.
165.
166.
167.
168.

Notes to pages 397–404
size, type of stem, and the part eaten. He concludes that the Bencao gangmu was “a
practical system whose end-purpose was not so much to allow the unambiguous
identiﬁcation of an unknown plant met with in nature, as an ordering . . . designed to
give access to information that would facilitate a correct curative or preventative
usage.”
WZZ, 712.
WZZ, 813.
WZZ, 712–13.
WZZ, 57–8.
In modern Shanxi.
In other words, lightning.
WZZ, 60.
WZZ, 60–1.
WZZ, 58–9.
That is, without deliberate purpose.
This was probably ball lighting.
WZZ, 61–2.
No explanation is given of the maidservant’s sin, if such there was.
WZZ, 62–3.
Sapinum sebiferum.
WZZ, 39.
WZZ, 39.
WZZ, 41.
WZZ, 25.
WZZ, 25–6.
WZZ, 29.
WZZ, 1061.
WZZ, 1064.
WZZ, 778.
WZZ, 781.
WZZ, 789.
Though see the pioneering work of Yim Shu-yuen, “Famine relief statistics as a guide
to the population of sixteenth-century China: A case-study of Honan province,”
Ch’ing-shih wen-t’i 3.9 (Nov. 1978), which shows, for one province at least, that the
ofﬁcial ﬁgures in late Ming may have only been a third of the correct total.
WZZ, 330.
WZZ, 331–2.
Modern Fuqing, south of Fuzhou.
The semilegendary ‘well-ﬁeld’ system was an arrangement of the ﬁelds in a three-bythree grid (like that for ticktacktoe). Eight families farmed the eight outer ﬁelds for
their own use, and cultivated the center one collectively to provide a tax for their lord.
The Chinese character for ‘well’ looks like a three-by-three grid. Hence the name.
WZZ, 308–9.
WZZ, 334.
WZZ, 336.
WZZ, 818. See page 391 above for his earlier comment.
WZZ, 195–6. The date, given only by the sexagenary Chinese cycle, might have been
1543. If so, Xie would not have seen it personally.
WZZ, 113.

Notes to pages 404–14

523

169. See F. L. Dunn, “Malaria,” in K. F. Kiple, ed., The Cambridge World History of Human
Disease (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 1993), esp. 856.
170. WZZ, 249–50.
171. WZZ, 227.
172. WZZ, 949–50.
173. WZZ, 818.
174. WZZ, 315–16.
175. WZZ, 48.
176. WZZ, 293.
177. WZZ, 307.
178. WZZ, 336.
179. WZZ, 80.
180. In Yongtai county in Fujian.
181. WZZ, 264.
182. It is worth noting that the translation of nupu by ‘serfs’ here can be justiﬁed by passages
such as that on page 259 about markets in Shandong where “mules, horses, cattle, sheep,
male and female serfs [nu-bei], and wives and children” were on sale. It may be that one
should even say ‘slaves’. Certainly ‘servants’ implies a degree of liberty that is not justiﬁed.
183. WZZ, 281–2.
184. WZZ, 285–6.
185. WZZ, 824. These are, respectively, Plantago spp., Cerastium vulgatum, Marsilia quadrifolia, and Artemisia stellerana. The ﬁrst, third, and fourth of these can be found in
B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription, and Translation (Museum
of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950), ##8, 15, and 13.
186. WZZ, 825. Li-plums are ‘plums’ generally, but probably mainly Prunus salcina and P.
communis. Mei-plums are P. mume, the ‘Japanese apricot’. Lotus buds are mentioned
in Karlgren, Odes, #145.
187. WZZ, 826–7.
188. WZZ, 838.
189. WZZ, 826.
190. WZZ, 846.
191. WZZ, 845–6. D. odora has a sweet scent, but is toxic.
192. WZZ, 840.
193. WZZ, 842.
194. WZZ, 853–4.
195. WZZ, 854. This last phrase is a reference to the lines of Tao Yuanming, “Having picked,
for tippling, chrysanthemums from beneath the eastern hedge, / I gaze wistfully at the
southern hills, distant and changeless forever” translated on page 333 above.

12 Imperial Dogma and Personal Perspectives
1. B. Karlgren, The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription, and Translation (Museum
of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm, 1950), #258.
2. Shangshu [The scripture of documents] (Pre-Qin: reprinted in Ruan Yuan, ed., Shisan
jing zhushu [The thirteen scriptures with notes and explanations] (Chūbun shuppansha: Kyōto, 1971), hereafter ShSh, I:406–7.
3. B. J. Mansvelt Beck, The Treatises of Later Han: Their Authors, Sources, Contents and
Place in Chinese Historiography (Brill: Leiden, 1990), 163.

524

Notes to pages 415–17

4. R. De Crespigny, Portents of Protest in the Later Han Dynasty (Faculty of Asian Studies
with the Australian National University Press: Canberra, 1976), 23.
5. The entire collection is called the Da Qing Shichao shengxun [The sacred instructions
of ten reigns of the Great Qing dynasty] (99 vols, n.p. and n.d. but evidently an ofﬁcial
publication). The years covered are 1616 to 1874. Most references below are to the
initials of the emperor’s reign-period and the subsection-number for the relevant ‘Jing
Tian’ section. These initials are: KX (Kangxi), YZ (Yongzheng) [1741], QL (Qianlong)
[1799], JQ (Jiaqing) [1829], and DG (Daoguang) [c. 1856]. See SCSX in the Bibliography
for more details.
6. E.g., SCSX, QL 29:2a, 5a, and 7a. Private imperial enthusiasm for Buddhism and
Daoism was of course of long standing. On Yongzheng and Chan Buddhism, see A.
Hummel, ed., Eminent Chinese of the Ch’ing Period (U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce:
Washington D.C., 1943), 918.
7. Yang Qiqiao, Yongzheng-di ji qi mizhe zhidu yanjiu [The Yongzheng emperor and his
system of secret memorials] (Sanlian shuju: Hong Kong, 1981), 26.
8. De Crespigny, Portents of Protest, 11. De Crespigny also draws attention to the possible
use of portents as a “means of conducting debate at one remove” in Court circles; see
Portents of Protest, 15.
9. On the succession question, see Hummel, Eminent Chinese, 916–17, and also H. Kahn,
Monarchy in the Emperor’s Eyes: Image and Reality in the Ch’ien-lung Reign (Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1971), 232 and 239, and Yang, Yongzheng Secret
Memorials, 37–70.
10. SCSX, QL 2:1a.
11. For some background remarks as to why one has to be skeptical about how deeply
entrenched they were see M. Elvin, “How did the cracks open? The origins of the
subversion of China’s late-traditional culture by the West,” Thesis Eleven 57, ‘East Asian
Perspectives’ (May 1999).
12. J. Chapman, “Climate,” in J. L. Buck, ed., Land Utilization in China (1937; reprinted,
Paragon: New York, 1964), 112: “percentage deviation about the annual mean precipitation [is] . . . about 30 per cent for the Wheat Region and become[s] higher as the
mean annual precipitation decreases.”
13. See R. B. Marks, “‘It never used to snow’: Climatic variability and harvest yields in lateimperial South China, 1650–1850,” in M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments of Time:
Environment and Society in Chinese History (Cambridge University Press: New York,
1998).
14. SCSX, KX 10:2a.
15. SCSX, KX 10:2b.
16. SCSX, KX 10:2b.
17. SCSX, QL 28:4b.
18. SCSX, YZ 8:2a
19. A real general, although stories about him differ, who became a god. See Cihai [Sea of
phrases] (Zhonghua shuju: Shanghai, 1947), hereafter CH, 190, and E. T. C. Werner,
Dictionary of Chinese Mythology (1932; reprinted, Julian Press: New York, 1961), 257–8.
Kangxi had prohibited ofﬁcial sacriﬁces to Liu Meng.
20. An indirect reminder that Liu Meng was not an authorized deity.
21. Note that ‘daemonic’ does not carry the implication of ‘demonic’ that these beings are
evil.
22. Da Qing Taizu . . . Gao-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions of Taizu of the Great
Qing] (Qing; ﬁrst preface 1686), hereafter DQTZ GHD SX, in SCSX 1:1b.

Notes to pages 417–28

525

23. Da Qing Taizong . . . Wen-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions of Taizong of the
Great Qing] (Qing), hereafter DQTZ WHD SX, in SCSX, 4:4ab.
24. DQTZ WHD SX, in SCSX, 1:3b.
25. Da Qing Shizu Zhang-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions of Shizu], hereafter
DQSZ ZHD SX, in SCSX, 1:4b.
26. See A. Lui, Two Rulers, One Reign: Dorgon and Shun-chih 1644–1660 (Faculty of Asian
Studies, Australian National University: Canberra, 1989).
27. SCSX, KX 10:2a.
28. SCSX, KX 10:2a.
29. SCSX, KX 10:2b.
30. On Chinese hypatotheism (the belief in a ‘top’ god who is not, however, a unique
god), see Elvin, “Transcendental breakthrough,” in M. Elvin, Another History: Essays on
China from a European Perspective (Wild Peony/Hawaii University Press: Sydney, 1996),
263–4.
31. SCSX, KX 10:4a.
32. Such as Xie Zhaozhe discussed in the previous chapter. See page 400 above.
33. SCSX, KX 10:3b.
34. Perhaps more appropriately, ‘Board of Astrology’.
35. SCSX, KX 10:3b.
36. SCSX, YZ 1:1ab.
37. For another use of this phrase, see SCSX, YZ 1:6b.
38. SCSX, YZ 1:4b.
39. SCSX, YZ 1:6b.
40. Apart from lightning. See M. Elvin, “The man who saw dragons: Science and styles of
thinking in Xie Zhaozhe’s Fivefold Miscellany,” Journal of the Oriental Society of Australia
25 and 26 (1993–4), 32–4.
41. V. Reichert, ed., Job (Soncino Press: London, 1946), chapter 21.
42. SCSX, YZ 1:1b.
43. SCSX, YZ 1:1b. See also 1:5a for another comparison with breathing.
44. SCSX, YZ 1:5a.
45. SCSX, YZ 1:5ab.
46. SCSX, YZ 1:7a.
47. SCSX, YZ 1:7b.
48. Yang, Yongzheng Secret Memorials, 27.
49. Yang, Yongzheng Secret Memorials, 28.
50. Yang, Yongzheng Secret Memorials, 28.
51. Yang, Yongzheng Secret Memorials, 28.
52. SCSX, YZ 8:3b.
53. SCSX, YZ 8:4a.
54. SCSX, YZ 8:7b.
55. SCSX, YZ 8:7ab.
56. One conventionally says ‘he issued’ but this avoids the question of how far he was
advised to do so by his senior Court ofﬁcials, and why.
57. SCSX, QL 27:1a.
58. On harvest percentile reports, see Marks, “‘It never used to snow’,” 422–35.
59. SCSX, QL 27:4b.
60. SCSX, QL 27:4b. A similar case is listed in QL 28:7b.
61. SCSX, QL 28:4a.
62. SCSX, QL 29:1b–2a.

526

Notes to pages 429–36

63. SCSX, JQ 14:8a.
64. It may be of interest to specialists that this sentence is contextually established as a
counterfactual conditional, a grammatical form sometimes thought not to exist in
Chinese. The structure here is Ruo . . . , wei you . . . zhe.
65. SCSX, JQ 14:8ab.
66. The major reigns of the mid-Qing were each in certain ways distinctive, and care should
be taken not to generalize on the basis of the Yongzheng patterns presented here.
67. Shizong shengxun [Sacred instructions of the Shizong Emperor {= Yongzheng}], hereafter SZSX (in SCSX), 22:2a.
68. SZSX, 24:1b.
69. SZSX, 12:5a.
70. SZSX, 25:1b.
71. SZSX, 25:4a.
72. SZSX, 26:5b–6a.
73. SZSX, 28:3a.
74. SZSX, 29:1b.
75. SZSX, 26:4b.
76. Jiashen in terms of the sixty-day cycle.
77. Jiawu.
78. SZSX, 28:2a.
79. Xinyou.
80. SZSX, 15:2a.
81. See E-tu Zen Sun, Ch’ing Administrative Terms: A Translation of the Terminology of the Six
Boards with Explanatory Notes (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1961), #417.
82. SZSX, 15:2b.
83. SZSX, 2:3b.
84. SZSX, 20:4b.
85. Often also written ‘Sungars’, as in Hummel, Eminent Chinese, 9–10, etc.
86. Hummel, Eminent Chinese, 264. The Eleuths, Fudan’s opponents, constituted the
dominant tribes in Zungharia.
87. Hummel, Eminent Chinese, 916–17.
88. E.g., SZSX 1:3b and 6a.
89. SZSX, 2:4b–5a.
90. SZSX, 2:2a.
91. SZSX, 2:5a.
92. SZSX, 2:4ab.
93. SZSX, 2:1a.
94. The report is noted in SZSX 20:1b, for 8 January 1727.
95. SZSX 1:5a–6a.
96. There is a mismatch of one day here according to the Liangqian-nian Zhong-Xi li
duizhao biao [A Sino-Western calendar for two thousand years, 1–2000 AD] (Shangwu
yinshu-guan: Hong Kong, 1961) hereafter ZXDB. The cyclical character indicates 31
December. Note that here, exceptionally, I have converted the Chinese lunar-calendar
dates into Western dates to make the pattern easier to follow.
97. There is the same one-day mismatch. The cyclical character indicates 4 February.
98. According to cyclical character dates, which may therefore be one day misaligned, as
indicated above.
99. The day cycle again indicates a day later.
100. Karlgren, Odes, #235, “Wen Wang.”

Notes to pages 436–50

527

101. I would like to pay tribute here to Professor Wolfgang Kubin, of Bonn University,
whose original idea for a conference on the feelings of ‘ease’ and ‘unease’ in Chinese
culture inspired me to look at the topic treated in this ﬁrst section, though the conference theme was later changed.
102. Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] (originally Guochao shiduo,
1869; reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), hereafter QSD, 113–14.
103. Qianmo. See Sima Qian, Shi ji [Records of the Grand Historian] (Han; reprinted,
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1959), hereafter SJ, ‘Qin benji’, 5:203, and ‘Shang-jun
liezhuan’, 2232.
104. Fenhui. A tentative rendering inspired by the fact that a hui could be an oxbow bend
left behind where a river had previously meandered. See Morita Akira, “Water Control
in Zhehdong during the later Ming” translated M. Elvin and K. Tamura, East Asian
History 2 (Dec. 1991), 61, footnote 90.
105. QSD, 174–5.
106. The translation of the last few words of this line is tentative.
107. Weirui, or Polygonatum ofﬁcinale.
108. QSD, 12.
109. QSD, 86.
110. QSD, 935.
111. QSD, 927–8.
112. QSD 579.
113. QSD, 554.
114. QSD, 454.
115. QSD, 440.
116. QSD, 479.
117. QSD, 473.
118. QSD, 142.
119. QSD, 143.
120. QSD, 175.
121. QSD, 13. ‘Clasts’ are sedimentary fragments of rock ranging in size from pebbles to
boulders.
122. QSD, 107.
123. QSD, 132.
124. QSD, 131.
125. QSD, 123–4.
126. M. Elvin, “Why China failed to create an endogenous industrial capitalism: A critique
of Max Weber’s explanation,” Theory and Society 13.3 (May 1984), 382.
127. QSD 122.
128. QSD, 117.
129. Zhou, that is one of the lowest-level administrative units, roughly on a level with a
‘county’ (xian).
130. QSD, 654.
131. QSD, 751.
132. QSD, 30.
133. QSD, 585.
134. QSD, 9.
135. QSD, 111. M. Loewe, “He Bo Count of the River, Feng Yi and Li Bing,” in R. May and J.
Minford, eds., A Birthday Book for Brother Stone (Chinese University Press: Hong
Kong, 2003), 197–201.

528

Notes to pages 451–63

136.
137.
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.

QSD, 471.
QSD, 500.
QSD, 504.
QSD, 506.
QSD, 508.
For example, QSD, 248 and 706.
QSD, 527.
QSD, 515.
QSD, 75.
QSD, 166 and 169.
QSD, 749.
QSD, 758.
QSD, 150–2. Translated in M. Elvin, “Unseen lives: The emotions of everyday existence
mirrored in Chinese popular poetry of the mid-seventeenth to the mid-nineteenth
century,” in R. T. Ames, R. Kasulis, and W. Dissanayake, eds., Self as Image in Asian
Theory and Practice (State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y., 1998), 118–26.
149. QSD, 756.

13 Concluding Remarks
1. K. Pomeranz, The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern
World Economy (Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J., 2002), esp. 239 and 283.
2. P. E. Will, “Clear waters versus muddy waters: The Zheng-Bai irrigation system of
Shaanxi province in the late-imperial period,” in M. Elvin and T.-J. Liu, eds., Sediments
of Time: Environment and Society in Chinese History (Cambridge University Press: New
York, 1998).
3. Missionaires de Pékin, Mémoires concernant l’histoire, les sciences, les arts, les moeurs,
les usages, &c. des Chinois, vols. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, and 11 (Nyon: Paris, 1776, 1777, 1779, 1780,
1782, and 1786), hereafter MCC, 11.334–42 describes the use of coal for domestic heating
and some handicrafts, like smithy work, in eighteenth-century Beijing. It was sold by
numerous shops, mostly in the form of briquettes in which the coal dust brought by
carts to the capital was mixed with ashes, and a little earth and water, and then shaped
in a mold. A small quantity of charcoal was usually needed to start these briquettes
burning. It took about a thousand pounds (‘livres’) of this coal to heat a medium-sized
room through the four months of winter.
4. Zhang Yingchang, ed., Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] (originally Guochao shi
duo, 1869; reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960), hereafter QSD, 174–5.
5. Full version on pages 439–40 above.
6. QSD, 927–8. Compare the version on page 442 above.
7. We need to use the term ‘cross-boundary’ rather than ‘international’ or ‘interregional’
here in order to leave open the decision as to what the most useful geographical units
of comparison are in any given instance.
8. MCC, 11.267.
9. MCC, 11.268.
10. MCC, 1.ii.
11. MCC, 1.xiii.
12. MCC, 5, ‘avertissement’.
13. MCC, 4.320–3.

Notes to pages 463–70
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

529

Maisons de plaisance.
All from MCC, 4.323.
MCC, 11.187.
MCC, 2.407.
MCC, 11.196. The quotation marks are designed to pick up the fact that the entire
passage in the original is in italics.
MCC, 8.293.
MCC, 8.295.
MCC, 8.298.
MCC, 2.414.
MCC, 4.318.
MCC, 11.226.
MCC, 11.218.
MCC, 11.225. The italics are in the original.
MCC, 2.402.
MCC, 11.227–8. Compare Xie Zhaozhe’s views on pages 404–5.
MCC, 4.343.
W. Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft (Verlag Paul Parey: Berlin, 1926), 212.
Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 211.
Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 238.
Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 181.
Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 181.
Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 179.
Note, for example, the comment by Wagner, Die chinesische Landwirtschaft, 239, that “I
will only stress that any progress through the present system of compensating for
[consumed] plant nutrients is not possible. Only if new sources of plant nutrients are
made available to the land, can the Chinese farm economy be capable of meeting the
increased demands of a self-developing national economy. It is in the nature of things
that synthetic fertilizers here become the unique issue. . . .” This theme is developed at
length in the last part of M. Elvin, The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford University
Press: Stanford, Calif., 1973).

13
Bibliography

Abbreviations for primary sources
CCXZ Chuci xuanzhu [The Songs of the South, with selected notes], Ma
Maoyuan, ed. Xinyue chubanshe: Hong Kong, 1962.
CH Cihai [Sea of phrases]. One-vol. edn.: Zhonghua shuju: Shanghai, 1947.
DQSZ ZHD SX Da Qing Shizu Zhang-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions of
Shizu]. In SCSX.
DQTZ GHD SX Da Qing Taizu . . . Gao-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions of
Taizu of the Great Qing]. Qing; ﬁrst preface 1686. In SCSX.
DQTZ WHD SX Da Qing Taizong . . . Wen-huangdi shengxun [Sacred instructions
of Taizong of the Great Qing]. Qing. In SCSX.
GSZ Ganshui zhi [Gazetteer for Ganshui]. Song. Chang Tang and Luo Shuhao, eds.
Reprinted in Zhonghua shuju bianzhibu, ed., Song-Yuan fangzhi congkan.
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1990.
GY Guoyu [The tales of the various states]. Pre-Qin. Shanghai guji chubanshe:
Shanghai, 1978.
GYFZ Guiyang fuzhi [Guiyang prefectural gazetteer]. Zhou Zuoji, comp. and rev.
Guiyang-fu xueshu: Guiyang(?), 1850. Microﬁlm courtesy of Harvard-Yenching
Library.
GZ Guanzi jiping [The Master Guan with collected appraisals]. Late fourth century
bce. Huang Jie and Lin Boxhou, eds., in Xiao Tianshi, gen. ed., Zhongguo zixue
mingzhu jicheng #69. Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng bianyin jijinhui: Taibei,
1978.
GZTZ Guizhou tongzhi [Comprehensive gazetteer of Guizhou]. 1741. Jing Daomo,
et al., comp. Reprinted, Huawen shuju: Taibei, 1968. Some passages are cited
from the Siku quanshu edn., vol. 572, which is noted where applicable.
HNXZ Haining xianzhi [Gazetteer of Haining county]. 1765. Reprinted as
Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #516, Huazhong. Chengwen: Taibei, 1983.

Bibliography

531

HNZ Huainanzi [The book of the Prince of Huainan]. 2nd century bce.
Reprinted, with Han-dynasty notes, from the 1804 edn., in Xiao Tianshi, gen.
ed., Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng #85. Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng
bianyin jijinhui: Taibei, 1978.
HTL Haitang-lu [A record of the seawall]. Di Junlian, ed., in Qinding siku quanshu,
Shi-bu, ce 583. Compiled between 1764 and 1781. Reprinted, Taiwan shangwu
yinshu-guan (Wenyuan-ge edn.): Taibei, 1986.
HZFZ /Q Hangzhou fuzhi [Hangzhou prefectural gazetteer]. 1898. Prefaces of 1888,
1894, and 1898. Reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #199, Huazhong.
Chengwen: Taibei, 1974.
JXFZ/M Jiaxing fuzhi [Jiaxing prefectural gazetteer]. 1600. Liu Yingke and Shen
Shaozhong, eds. Reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #505, Huazhong.
Chengwen: Taibei, 1983.
JXFZ/Q Jiaxing fuzhi [Jiaxing prefectural gazetteer]. 1879. Xu Yaoguang et al., rev.,
Wu Yangxian, et al., comp. Reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congshu #53,
Huazhong. 5 vols., Chengwen: Taibei, 1970.
LHJS Lun heng jiaoshi [Wang Chong’s ‘Discourses weighed in the balance’,
corrected and explained]. Han. Huang Hui, ed. 4 vols., Shangwu yinshuguan:
Taibei, 1964.
LJ Liji [Records of ritual behavior]. Later Han [of earlier materials]. Reprinted in
vol. 4 of Jūsan kei chūso = Shisan jing zhushu [The thirteen scriptures annotated
and explained]. 7 vols., Chūbun shuppansha: Tokyo, 1971.
LZXJSZ Liezi xuanji sanzhong [Three selected versions of the Liezi]. Han? In Xiao
Tianshi, gen. ed., Zhongguo zixue mingzhu jicheng 64. Zhongguo zixue mingzhu
jicheng bianyin jijinhui: Taibei, 1978.
MCC Mémoires concernant l’histoire, les sciences, les arts, les moeurs, les usages &c
des Chinois, par les Missionaires de Pékin, Vols. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, and 11. Nyon: Paris,
1776–86.
MQBT Mengqi bitan [Jottings from {the garden of} the brook of dreams], by Shen
Gua. Song. Hu Daojing, ed., as Xinjiaozheng ‘Mengqi bitan’. Zhonghua shuju:
Hong Kong, 1975.
QHDFJZWZ Qinghai difang jiu zhi wu-zhong [Five old local gazetteers from
Qinghai]. Qing. Li Qing, ed. Reprinted, Qinghai Renmin chubanshe: Xining,
1989.
QSD Qing shi duo [The Qing bell of poesy] (originally Guochao shiduo). 1869.
Zhang Yingchang, ed. Reprinted, Xinhua shudian: Beijing, 1960.
QW Quan shanggu sandai Qin-Han liuchao wen [Complete literature from high
antiquity, the Three Dynasties, the Qin and Han, and the Six Dynasties].
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1965.
RHXZ Renhe xianzhi [Renhe county gazetteer]. Reprinted in Zhonghua fangzhi
congshu #179, Huazhong. Chengwen: Taibei, 1975.
SCSX [Da Qing] Shichao shengxun [The sacred instructions of ten reigns of the
Great Qing dynasty [1616–1874], 99 vols. The ﬁrst preface is from 1666, the last
from 1880. There are no publication details, but dates of ﬁrst printing of reignperiod sections, where known, are appended in brackets to the list of abbreviations

532

Bibliography

below. Each of these reigns has a full title in the general form ‘Da Qing X zong
(. . .) Y huangdi shengxun’, where the dots in parentheses stand for the
emperor’s full formal title. ‘Jing Tian’ sections of these are referred to by the
initials of the emperor’s reign-period and the subsection number. These initials
are: XH (Kangxi), YZ (Yongzheng) [1741], QL (Qianlong) [1799], JQ (Jiaqing)
[1829], and DG (Daoguang) [c. 1856]. References to other parts of the Instructions
are given by juan and double-page in the usual way. See also DQSZ ZHD SX,
DQTZ GHD SX, and DQTZ WHD SX.
SGZ Sanguo zhi [Record of the Three Kingdoms]. Jin. Chen Shou, comp.
Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1969.
ShSh Shangshu [The scripture of documents]. Pre-Qin. Reprinted in Ruan Yuan,
ed., Shisan jing zhushu [The thirteen scriptures with notes and explanations].
Chūbun shuppansha: Kyōto, 1971.
SJ Shiji [Records of the Grand Historian], by Sima Qian, Han. Reprinted,
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1959.
SJS Shangjun shu jiegu dingben [The book of the Lord of Shang, deﬁnitive edition
with explanations]. Pre-Qin. Zhu Shiche, ed. Guji chubanshe: Beijing, 1956.
SXFZ Shaoxing fu zhi [Gazetteer for Shaoxing prefecture]. 1719. Zhou Xucai,
comp., and Yu Qing, rev. Reprinted in Zhongguo fangzhi congkan, #537,
Huazhong. Chengwen: Taibei, 1983.
SZSX Shizong shengxun [Sacred instructions of the Shizong Emperor {=
Yongzheng}]. In SCSX.
WX Wenxuan [The Chinese anthology]. Sixth century. Xiao Tong, comp., and Li
Shan, annot., 1181 edn. Reprinted, 4 cases, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1974.
WZZ Wu zazu [Fivefold miscellany], by Xie Zhaozhe. 1608. Reprinted under the
supervision of Li Weizhen. Xinxing shuju: Taibei, 1971.
YL Yueling [Ordinances for the months]. Pre-Qin. In Chen Hao, ed., Liji jishuo [The
Record of the Rites, with collected explanations]. Shijie shuju: Taibei, 1969.
ZGRMDCD Zhongguo renming da cidian [Large Chinese biographical dictionary].
Fang He, et al., eds. Taixing shuju: Hong Kong, 1931.
ZGZRZYCS Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu [Series on the natural resources of
China]. Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu bianzhuan weiyuanhui, ed. 42 vols.,
Zhongguo huanjing kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1995. Volumes are mainly by
province, some by topic.
ZHTZ Zunhua tongzhi [Zunhua department comprehensive gazetteer]. He
Songtai, et al., eds. Zunhua, ?1886. Microﬁlm courtesy of Columbia University
Library. In some juan the pagination restarts in each subsection. Where necessary for clarity, the subsection heading is therefore included.
ZHXZ Zunhua xianzhi [Zunhua county gazetteer]. Zunhua xianzhi bianzuan
weiyuanhui, ed. Hebei renmin chubanshe: Shijiazhuang, 1990.
ZL Zhouli zhushu [The Rituals of Zhou, with notes and explanations]. Late ﬁrst
millennium bce. Ruan Yuan (Qing), ed., in Shisan jing zhushu [The thirteen
classics with notes and explanations]. Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1980.
ZXDB Liangqian-nian Zhong-Xi li duizhao biao [A Sino-Western calendar for two
thousand years, 1–2000 ad]. Shangwu yinshu-guan: Hong Kong, 1961.

Bibliography

533

ZYJHZ Zhiyuan Jiahe zhi [Gazetteer for Jiahe {≈ Jiaxing} in the Zhiyuan reignperiod (1264–94)]. Yuan. Xu Shi, comp., Shan Qing, rev. Reprinted in Zhonghua
shuju bianzhibu, ed., Song-Yuan fangzhi congkan. 8 vols., Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1990.
ZZD Zhongguo ziran dili: Lishi ziran dili [The natural geography of China: Historical natural geography]. Zhongguo kexue-yuan Zhongguo ziran dili bianji
Weiyuanhui, ed. Zhongguo huanjing kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1982.
ZZJS Zhuangzi jishi [The Zhuangzi, with collected explanations]. Guo Qingfan, ed.
Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1961.
ZZZC Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu [Series on the natural resources of China].
Zhongguo ziran ziyuan congshu bianzhuan weiyuanhui, ed. 42 vols., Zhongguo
huanjing kexue chubanshe: Beijing, 1995.

Books and articles
Agricola, Georgius [G. Bauer]. 1556. De Re Metallica. H. C. and L. H. Hoover,
transl. and ed. 1912. Reprinted, Dover: New York, 1950.
Amelung, I. 1999. “Der Gelbe Fluss in Shandong (1851–1911): Überschwemmungskatastrophen und ihre Bewältigungen im spät-kaiserlichen China.” Ph.D.
thesis, Institut für Philosophie, Wissenschaftstheorie, Wissenschafts-und Technikgeschichte, Technische Universität Berlin.
Arthur, W. Brian. 1990. “Positive feedbacks in the economy,” Scientiﬁc American
262.2 (Feb.).
Bachelard, G. 1957. La Formation de l’esprit scientiﬁque, 3rd edn. Vrin: Paris.
Baechler, J. 1985. Démocraties. Calmann-Lévy: Paris.
Baechler, J. 2000. Nature et histoire. Presses Universitaires de France: Paris.
Baechler, J. 2002. Esquisse d’une histoire universelle. Fayard: Paris.
Bak, P. 1997. How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
Barry, R. G. and R. J. Chorley. 1987. Atmosphere, Weather and Climate, 5th edn.
Methuen: London.
Beck, B. J. Mansvelt. 1990. The Treatises of Later Han: Their Authors, Sources,
Contents and Place in Chinese Historiography. Brill: Leiden.
Benedict, C. 1996. Bubonic Plague in Nineteenth-Century China. Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif.
Berenbaum, M. 1994. Bugs in the System: Insects and their Impact on Human Affairs.
Addison-Wesley: Reading, Mass.
Billeter, J. F., et al. 1993. “Florilège des Notes du Ruisseau des Rêves (Mengqi bitan)
de Shen Gua (1031–1095),” Études Asiatiques XLVII.3.
Blunden, C. and M. Elvin. 1983. Cultural Atlas of China. Facts on File. New York.
Rev. edn, Checkmark: New York, 1998.
Bodde, D. 1978. “Marshes in Mencius and elsewhere: A lexicographical note.” In D.
Roy and T. Tsien, eds., Ancient China: Studies in Early Civilization. Chinese
University Press: Hong Kong.

534

Bibliography

Bonyhady, T. 1995. “Artists with axes.” Environment and History 1.2.
Brenier, J. C., J. P. Diény, J.-C. Martzloff, and W. de Wieclawik. 1989. “Shen Gua
(1031–1095) et les sciences.” Revue d’histoire des sciences XLII.4.
Brown, J., A. Collings, D. Park, J. Philips, D. Rothery, and J. Wright. 1991.Waves,
Tides and Shallow-Water Processes, rev. edn. Pergamon: Oxford.
Brunnert, H. S. and V. V. Hagelstrom. 1912. Present Day Political Organization of
China, transl. A. Beltchenko and E. E. Moran. Kelly and Walsh: Shanghai.
Anonymous reprint: Taibei, 1960.
Buck, J. L. (ed.). 1937. Land Utilization in China. University of Nanking: Nanking,
1937. Reprinted, Paragon: New York, 1964.
Burnet, F. McF. 1972. Natural History of Infectious Diseases, rev. edn. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.
Cao Peikui, Gu Guochuan, Dong Yongfa, and Hu Fangxi. 1985. “Hangzhou-wan
nisha yundong-de jiben tezheng” [The basic characteristics of sediment transport in Hangzhou Bay]. Huadong Shifan Daxue xuebao 3.
Cao Shuji. 2001. Qing shiqi [The Qing period]. In Ge Jianxiong, ed., Zhongguo
renkou shi [History of China’s population series], vol. 5, Qing period. Fudan
daxue chubanshe: Shanghai.
Chamley, H. 1987. Sédimentologie. Dunod: Paris.
Chang, H. T. [Zhang Hongzhao]. 1926. “On the question of the existence of
elephants and the rhinoceros in northern China in historical times.” Bulletin of
the Geological Society of China 5.
Chang, K.-C. 1980. Shang Civilization. Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn.
Chao Lin. 1982. The Socio-Political System of the Shang Dynasty. Academia Sinica:
Taibei.
Chapman, J. 1937. “Climate.” In J. L. Buck, ed., Land Utilization in China.
Chen, J., T. C. Campbell, J. Li, and R. Peto. 1990. Diet, Life-style and Mortality in
China: A Study of the Characteristics of 65 Chinese Counties. Oxford University
Press, Cornell University Press, and People’s Medical Publishing House: Oxford.
Chen Jiaqi. 1987. “Nan Song yilai Taihu liuyu dalao-dahan ji jinqi qushi guji”
[Major ﬂoods and droughts in the Lake Tai basin since the Southern Song, and
an estimation of the trend in the near future]. Dili yanjiu 6.1 (Mar.).
Chen Jiyu, Luo Zude, Chen Dechang, Xu Haigen, and Qiao Pengnian. 1964.
“Qiantang-jiang hekou shakan-de xingcheng ji qi lishi yanbian” [The formation
of and the historical changes in the sandbar at the mouth of the Qiantang
River]. Dili xuebao 30.2 (June).
Chen Qiaoyi. 1965. “Gudai Shaoxing diqu tianran senlin-de pohuai ji qi dui
nongye-de yingxiang” [The destruction in ancient times of the natural forests
of Shaoxing and its impact on agriculture]. Dili xuebao 31.2 (June).
Chen Qiaoyi. 1981. “Lun lishi shiqi Puyang-jiang xiayou-de hedao bianqian”
[Changes in the lower course of the Puyang River in historical times]. Lishi dili 1.
Chen Rong. 1983. Zhongguo senlin shiliao [Historical materials on China’s forests].
Xinhua: Beijing.
Chen Shu. 1963. Qidan shehui jingji shigao [Draft history of the society and
economy of the Qidan]. Sanlian: Beijing.

Bibliography

535

Cheng Mingjiu (Hezhu). (comp.) 1702. Sanjiangzha-wu quanshu [Complete documents relating to the affairs of the lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth]. Prefaces of
1684, 1685, and 1687. Republished with a continuation in 1854 (see Ping Heng).
Cheng Te-k’un [Zheng Dekun]. 1960. Archaeology in China, vol. 2, Shang. Heffer
and Sons: Cambridge.
Chinese Academy of Sciences. 1982. Zhongguo ziran dili [Natural geography of
China]. Kexue chubanshe: Beijing.
Chou Zhao'ao. (ed.) 1955. Du Shaoling ji xiangzhu [Du Fu’s collected works with
detailed notes]. 4 vols., Wenxue guji kanxingshe: Beijing.
Clastres, P. 1974. Society against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology. English
translation, Zone Books: New York, 1987.
Cohen, M. 1989. Health and the Rise of Civilization. Yale University Press: New
Haven, Conn.
Cook, F. 1977. Hua-yen Buddhism. Pennsylvania State University Press: University
Park, Penn.
Corbin, A. 1988. Le Territoire du vide: L’Occident et le désir du rivage, 1750–1840.
Aubier: Paris.
Couvreur, S. 1914. Tch’ouen Ts’iou et Tso Tchouan: La Chronique de la principauté
de Lou. Reprinted, bilingual text, 3 vols., Cathasia: Paris, 1951.
Couvreur, S. 1911. Dictionnaire classique de la langue chinoise. Imprimerie de la
Mission Catholique: Hejian fu.
Crombie, A. C. 1994. Styles of Scientiﬁc Thinking in the European Tradition. 3 vols.,
Duckworth: London.
Dali-zhou Wenlian [Literary Association of Dali {Yunnan}]. 2001. Dali gu yishu
chao [Transcriptions of ancient lost books from Dali]. Yunnan Renmin
chubanshe: Kunming.
De Crespigny, R. 1976. Portents of Protest in the Later Han Dynasty. Faculty of Asian
Studies with the Australian National University Press: Canberra.
Delahaye, H. 1981. Les Premières Peintures de paysage en Chine: Aspects religieux.
École française d’Extrême-Orient: Paris.
Deng Gang [Kent]. 1993. Development versus Stagnation: Technological Continuity
and Agricultural Progress in Pre-Modern China. Greenwood: Westport, Conn.
Di Cosmo, N. 2002. Ancient China and Its Enemies: The Rise of Nomadic Power in
East Asian History. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Ding Yihui. 1994. Monsoons over China. Kluwer: Dordrecht.
Dodgen, R. 2001. Controlling the Dragon: Confucian Engineers and the Yellow River
in Late Imperial China. University of Hawaii Press: Honolulu.
Duan Chengshi. Tang. Youyang zazu [Miscellany from Youyang]. Reprinted in
Wenyuan edn of the Qinding Siku quanshu, vol. 1047. Shangwu yinshu-guan:
Taibei, 1983.
Dunn, F. L. 1993. “Malaria.” In K. F. Kiple, ed., History of Human Disease.
Dunstan, H. 1975. “The Late Ming epidemics: A preliminary survey.” Ch’ing-shih
wen-t’i 3.3.
Elias, N. 1994 (orig. 1939). The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners. Transl.
E. Jephcott, Blackwell: Oxford. Rev. edn., 2 vols. Vol. 1 ﬁrst published 1978.

536

Bibliography

Elman, B. A. 1984. From Philosophy to Philology: Intellectual and Social Aspects of
Change in Late Imperial China. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass.
Elvin, M. 1973. The Pattern of the Chinese Past. Stanford University Press: Stanford,
Calif.
Elvin, M. 1975. “On water control and management during the Ming and Ch’ing
periods,” [a review article of Morita Akira, Shindai suirishi kenkyū {Studies on
water control in the Qing dynasty} (Aki shobō: Tokyo, 1974)], Ch’ing-shih went’i 3.3 (Nov.).
Elvin, M. 1977. “Market towns and waterways: The county of Shang-hai from 1480
to 1910.” In G. W. Skinner, ed., The City in Late Imperial China. Stanford University Press: Stanford, Calif.
Elvin, M. 1984. “Why China failed to create an endogenous industrial capitalism:
A critique of Max Weber’s explanation.” Theory and Society 13.3 (May).
Elvin, M. 1986. “Was there a transcendental breakthrough in China?” In S. N.
Eisenstadt, ed., The Axial Age and its Diversity. State University of New York
Press: Albany, N.Y. Reprinted in Elvin, ed., Another History.
Elvin, M. 1993. “Three thousand years of unsustainable growth: China’s environment from archaic times to the present.” East Asian History 6 (Nov.).
Elvin, M. 1993–4. “The man who saw dragons: Science and styles of thinking in
Xie Zhaozhe’s Fivefold Miscellany.” Journal of the Oriental Society of Australia 25
and 26.
Elvin, M. and N. Su. 1995a. “Man against the sea: Natural and anthropogenic
factors in the changing morphology of Harngzhou Bay, circa 1000–1800.” Environment and History 1.1. (Feb.).
Elvin, M. and N. Su. 1995b. “Engineering the sea: Hydraulic systems and premodern technological lock-in in the Harngzhou Bay area circa 1000–1800.” In
Itō Suntarō and Yoshida Yoshinori, eds., Age of Environmental Crisis.
Elvin, M. (ed.) 1996. Another History: Essays on China from a European Perspective.
Wild Peony/Hawaii University Press: Sydney.
Elvin, M. 1997. Changing Stories in the Chinese World. Stanford University Press:
Stanford, Calif.
Elvin, M. 1998. “Unseen lives: The emotions of everyday existence mirrored in
Chinese popular poetry of the mid-seventeenth to the mid-nineteenth century.”
In R. T. Ames, R. Kasulis, and W. Dissanayake, eds., Self as Image in Asian Theory
and Practice. State University of New York Press: Albany, N.Y.
Elvin, M. and T.-J. Liu (eds.) 1998. Sediments of Time: Environment and Society in
Chinese History. Cambridge University Press: New York.
Elvin, M. and N. Su. 1998. “Action at a distance: The inﬂuence of the Yellow River on
Hangzhou Bay since ad 1000.” In Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
Elvin, M. 1999a. “Blood and statistics: Reconstructing the population dynamics of
late imperial China from the biographies of virtuous women in local
gazetteers.” In H. Zurndorfer, ed., Chinese Women in the Imperial Past: New
Perspectives. Brill: Leiden.
Elvin, M. 1999b. “How did the cracks open? The origins of the subversion of China’s
late-traditional culture by the West.” Thesis Eleven 57, ‘East Asian Perspectives’.

Bibliography

537

Elvin, M., D. Crook, Shen Ji, R. Jones, and J. Dearing. 2002. “The impact of clearance and irrigation on the environment in the Lake Erhai catchment from the
ninth to the nineteenth century.” East Asian History 23 (June).
Fan Ye. c. 445. Hou Han shu [History of the Later Han]. Reprinted, Zhonghua
shuju: Beijing, 1965.
Fang, J.-Q. and G. Liu. 1992. “Relationship between climatic change and the
nomadic southward migrations in East Asia during historical times.” Climatic
Change 22.
Feng Erkang. 1992. Yongzheng zhuan [A life of the Yongzheng Emperor]. Taiwan
shangwu: Taibei.
Fletcher, R. 1995. The Limits of Settlement Growth: A Theoretical Outline.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Fox, B. and A. Cameron. 1997. Food Science, Nutrition and Health, 6th edn. Arnold:
London.
Frodsham, J. D. 1967. The Murmuring Stream: The Life and Works of the Chinese
Nature Poet Hsieh Ling-yün (385–433), Duke of K’ang-Lo. 2 vols., University of
Malaya Press: Kuala Lumpur.
Fu Yiling. 1961. Ming-Qing nongcun shehui jingji [The social economy of villages in
Ming and Qing times]. Sanlian: Beijing.
Fu Yiling. 1963. Mingdai Jiangnan shimin jingji shitan [Essay on the urban economy
of Jiangnan in Ming times]. Shanghai renmin: Shanghai.
Fu Zehong (ed.). c. 1725. Xingshui jinjian [The golden mirror of the passing
streams]. Reprinted, in Shen Yunlong, ed., Zhongguo shuiliyaoji congbian,
Wenhai: Taibei, 1969.
Fujita Katsuhisa. 1986. “Kandai no Kōka shisui kikō” [Flood control measures on
the Yellow River under the Han dynasty]. Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 16.
Garrow, J. and W. James (eds.). 1998. Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 9th edn.
Churchill Livingstone: Edinburgh.
Gernet, J. 1972. Le Monde chinois. Colin: Paris.
Giles, H. 1912. A Chinese–English Dictionary, 2nd edn. Kelly and Walsh: Shanghai.
Reprinted, Jingwen shuju: Taibei, 1964.
Giudici, N. 2000. La Philosophie du Mont Blanc: De l’alpinisme à l’économie
immatérielle. Grasset: Paris.
Glacken, C. J. 1967. Traces on the Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western
Thought from Ancient Times to the End of the Eighteenth Century. University of
California Press: Berkeley, Calif.
Gledhill, J., B. Bender, and M. Larsen (eds.). 1988. State and Society: The Emergence
and Development of Social Hierarchy and Political Centralization. Reprinted,
London: Routledge, 1995.
Golson, J. 1997. “From horticulture to agriculture in the New Guinea Highlands:
A case study of people and their environments.” In P. Kirch and T. Hunt,
eds., Historical Ecology in the Paciﬁc Islands. Yale University Press: New Haven,
Conn.
Gonda, J. 1979. Les Religions de l’Inde, vol. 1, Védisme et hindouisme ancien. Translated from the German; Payot: Paris.

538

Bibliography

Greenwood, L. H. 1935. Epidemics and Crowd Diseases. Macmillan: New York.
Grove, A. and O. Rackham. 2001. The Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History. Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn.
Grove, R., V. Damodaran, and S. Sangwan (eds.). 1998. Nature and the Orient: The
Environmental History of South and Southeast Asia. Oxford University Press:
New Delhi.
Gu Shaobo and Wang Honglu. 1987. Xie Lingyun-ji jiaozhu [The works of Xie
Lingyun with variant readings and notes]. Zhongzhou guji chubanshe: n.p.
[He'nan].
Gu Yanwu (comp.). 1639–62. Tianxia junguo libing shu [Documents on the advantageous and disadvantageous aspects of the principates and commanderies of
the empire]. Reprinted, Shangwu yinshuguan: Shanghai, 1936. Siku shanben
facsimile reprint, reissued Taibei: n.d.
Gu Yingtai. 1658. Mingshi jishi benmo [Main themes and details of Ming history
recounted]. Reprinted, 4 vols., Shangwu: Taibei, 1956.
Gu Zuyu (ed.). 1667. Dushi fangyu jiyao [Essential geography for the reading of
history]. Reprinted, Xinxing: Taibei, 1972.
Guha, Sumit. 1999. Environment and Ethnicity in India, 1200–1991. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.
Guo Zhengzhong. 1990. Songdai yanye jingji shi [An economic history of the salt
industry during the Song dynasty]. Renmin chubanshe: Beijing.
Hallam, A. (ed.). 1977. Planet Earth. Phaidon: Oxford.
Hardy, A. 1998. “A history of migration to upland areas in 20th century Vietnam.”
Ph.D. thesis, Australian National University.
Hawkes, D. 1959. Ch’u Tz’u: The Songs of the South. Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Revised edn, Penguin: London, 1985.
He Baochuan. 1991. China on the Edge: The Crisis of Ecology and Development.
China Books: San Francisco, Calif.
Hoshi Ayao. 1966. Chūgoku shakai-keizei-shi go-i [Glossary of terms in China’s
social and economic history]. Kindai Chūgoku kenkyūsentā: Tokyo.
Hoshi Ayao. 1969. The Tribute Grain Transport under the Ming Dynasty. Transl.
M. Elvin, Center for Chinese Studies: Ann Arbor, Mich.
Hoshi Ayao (comp.). 1975. Chu¯goku shakai keizai shi go-i zokuhen [Supplement
to ‘A glossary of terms in Chinese social and economic history’]. Ko¯bundo¯:
Yamagata.
Hou Xueyu. 1988. Zhongguo ziran dili [The natural geography of China], vol. 2,
Zhiwu dili [Vegetation geography]. Kexue chubanshe: Beijing.
Hou Yunqin (Comp. and rev.) 1854/55. Dengchuan zhouzhi [Dengchuan department gazetteer]. Reprinted, Chengwen chubanshe: Taibei, 1968.
Hughes, J. D. 1994. Pan’s Travail: Environmental Problems of the Ancient Greeks and
Romans. Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, Md.
Hummel, A. (ed.). 1943. Eminent Chinese of the Ch’ing Period. 2 vols., U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce: Washington D.C.
Itō Hashiko. 1986. “Sōdai no Kōka shisui kikō” [The structure of ﬂood control on
the Yellow River under the Song dynasty]. Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 16.

Bibliography

539

Itō Suntarō and Yoshida Yoshinori (eds.). 1995. Nature and Humankind in the Age
of Environmental Crisis. International Research Center for Japanese Studies:
Kyoto.
Jeník, J. 1979. Pictorial Encyclopedia of Forests. Hamlyn: London.
Ji Han. Fourth century ce. Nanfang caomu zhuang [The forms of the plants and
trees of the South]. Transl. Hui-lin Li, A Fourth Century Flora of Southeast Asia,
Chinese University Press: Hong Kong, 1979.
Jin Weixian. 1981. Qidan-de Dongbei zhengce [The administrative policies of the
Qidan in Manchuria]. Huashi chubanshe: Taibei.
Kahn, H. 1971. Monarchy in the Emperor’s Eyes: Image and Reality in the Ch’ien-lung
Reign. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass.
Kaizuka Shigeki. 1979. Chūgoku kodai sai hakken [Further discoveries about
Chinese antiquity]. Iwanami: Tokyo.
Kalinowski, M. 1990. “Le Calcul du rayon céleste dans la cosmographie chinoise.”
Revue d’histoire des sciences XLIII.1.
Karlgren, B. 1950. The Book of Odes: Chinese Text, Transcription, and Translation.
Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities: Stockholm.
Karlgren, B. 1957. Grammata Serica Recensa. Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities:
Stockholm.
Katz, P. R. 1995. Demon Hordes and Burning Boats: The Cult of Marshal Wen in Late
Imperial Chekiang. State University of New York Press: Albany, NY.
Kawakatsu Mamoru. 1992. Min-Shin Kōnan nōgyō keizai-shi kenkyū [Researches on
the farm economy of Ming and Qing Jiangnan]. Tōkyō Daigaku shuppankai:
Tokyo.
Keightley, D. 1978. Sources of Shang History: The Oracle-Bone Inscriptions of Bronze
Age China. University of California Press: Berkeley, Calif.
Keightley, D. 1999. “The environment of ancient China.” In M. Loewe and E.
Shaughnessy, eds., The Cambridge History of Ancient China. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. Now greatly expanded as The Ancestral Landscape: Time,
Space, and Community in Late Shang China. Institute of East Asian Studies,
University of California: Berkeley, 2000.
Kellert, S. R., and E. O. Wilson (eds.). 1993. The Biophilia Hypothesis, Island Press:
Washington D.C.
Kellert, S. R. 1995. “The Biophilia Hypothesis: Aristotelian echoes of the ‘Good
Life’.” In Itō and Yoshida, The Age of Environmental Crisis.
Kellert, S. R. 1997. Kinship to Mastery: Biophilia in Human Evolution and Development. Island Press/Shearwater Books: Washington D.C.
Kiple, K. F. (ed.). 1993. The Cambridge World History of Human Disease. Cambridge
University Press: New York.
Lamb, H. H. 1995. Climate, History and the Modern World. Routledge: London.
Lamp, C. A., S. J. Forbes, and J. W. Cade. 1990. Grasses of Temperate Australia.
Inkata Press: Melbourne.
Lawlor, R. 1991. Voices of the First Day: Awakening in the Aboriginal Dreamtime.
Inner Traditions International: Rochester, Vt.
Lee, J. and Wang Feng. 1999a. “Malthusian models and Chinese realities: The

540

Bibliography

Chinese demographic system 1700–2000.” Population and Development Review
25 (1).
Lee, J. and Wang Feng. 1999b. One Quarter of Humanity: Malthusian Mythology
and Chinese Realities, 1700–2000. Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
Mass.
Legge, J. 1861. The Works of Mencius, volume 2 in The Chinese Classics with a Translation, Critical and Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes. 7 vols.,
Trübner: London.
Leonard, J. 1996. Controlling from Afar: The Daoguang Emperor’s Management of
the Grand Canal Crisis, 1824–1826. Center for Chinese Studies, University of
Michigan: Ann Arbor, Mich.
Leopold, A. 1949. A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There. Oxford
University Press: New York.
Lewis, M. E. 1990. Sanctioned Violence in Early China. State University of New York
Press: Albany, N.Y.
Lewis, M. E. 1999. Writing and Authority in Early China. State University of New
York Press: Albany, N.Y.
Leys, S. [P. Ryckmans]. 1997. The Analects of Confucius. Norton: New York.
Li Bozhong. 1990. Tangdai Jiangnan nongye-de fazhan [The development of agriculture in Jiangnan under the Tang dynasty]. Nongye chubanshe: Beijing.
Li Bozhong. 1998. “Changes in climate, land, and human efforts: The production
of wet-ﬁeld rice in Jiangnan during the Ming and Qing dynasties”. In Elvin and
Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
Li Shizhen. 1596. Bencao gangmu [Pharmacopeia arranged by headings and subheadings]. Reprinted, 5 vols. and index, Shangwu yinshuguan: Shanghai, 1930.
Li Yuan. 1794. Shu shuijing [The classic of the waterways of Sichuan]. Reprinted, 2
vols., Ba-Shu shushe: Chengdu, 1985.
Li Yuanfang. 1991. “Fei-Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de yanbian” [Changes in the deltas
of the abandoned Yellow River]. Dili xuebao 10.4.
Li Zhiyang (ed.). 1563. Jiajing Dali fuzhi [Jiajing reign-period Dali prefectural
gazetteer]. Incomplete. Microﬁlm 1055 in the Menzies Library, Australian
National University.
Lin Chengkun. 1989. “Changjiang-kou nisha-de laiyuan fenxi yu shiliang jisuan-de
yanjiu” [Analysis of the sources and quantities of sediments at the estuary of the
Yangzi River]. Dili xuebao 44.1.
Lin Chengkun. 1990. “Changjiang yu Hangzhou-wan-de nisha yu hechuang
yanbian dui Shanghai ji qi tonghai hangdao jianshe-de yingxiang” [The
inﬂuence of the sediment in the Yangzi River estuary and Hangzhou Bay, and
changes in the river bed, on the port of Shanghai and the construction of shipping channels giving access to the sea]. Dili xuebao 45.1.
Lin Hongrong. 1985. “Sichuan gudai senlin-de bianqian” [Changes in the ancient
forests of Sichuan] and “Lishi shiqi Sichuan senlin-de bianqian” [Changes in the
forests of Sichuan during the historical period], in four continuous parts.
Nongye kaogu 9.1 and 10.2.
Lin Lüzhi. 1973. Xianbi shi [A history of the Xianbi]. Bowen shuju: Hong Kong.

Bibliography

541

Liu Ts’ui-Jung. 1998. “Han migration and the settlement of Taiwan: The onset of
environmental change.” In Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
Liu Ts’ui-Jung. 1999. “Zhongguo lishi-shang guanyu shanlinchuanze-de guannian
he zhidu” [The concepts and institutional forms relating to mountains, forests,
rivers, and marshes in Chinese history]. In Cao Tianwang, Lai Jingchang, and
Yang Jiancheng, eds., Zhongyang yanjiuyuan Zhongshan renwen shehui kexue
yanjiusuo juanshu 46. Academia Sinica: Taibei.
Liu, T.-J., J. Lee, and A. Morita (eds.). 2001. Asian Population History. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
Liu Yang and E. Capon. 2000. Masks of Mystery: Ancient Chinese Bronzes from
Sanxingdui. Art Gallery of New South Wales: Sydney.
Liu Zongyuan. Tang. Liu Zongyuan ji [Collected works of Liu Zongyuan].
Zhonghua shuju: Taibei, 1978.
Loewe, M. 2003. “He Bo Count of the River, Feng Yi and Li Bing.” In R. May and
J. Minford, eds., A Birthday Book for Brother Stone. Chinese University Press:
Hong Kong.
Lombard-Salmon, C. 1972. Un Exemple d’acculturation chinoise: La province de
Guizhou. École française d’Extrême-Orient: Paris.
Lui, A. 1989. Two Rulers, One Reign: Dorgon and Shun-chih 1644–1660. Faculty of
Asian Studies, Australian National University: Canberra.
Macfarlane, A. 1997. The Savage Wars of Peace. Blackwell: Oxford.
MacPherson, K. 1998. “Cholera in China, 1820–1930: An aspect of the internationalization of infectious disease.” In Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
Maddalena, A. 1970. “Rural Europe 1500–1750.” In C. M. Cipolla, ed., The Fontana
Economic History of Europe. Collins: Glasgow. Reprinted, Collins: Glasgow, 1974.
Maisels, C. K. 1999. Early Civilizations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of
Egypt, The Levant, Mesopotamia, India and China. Routledge: London.
Mann, M. 1998. “Ecological change in North India: Deforestation and agrarian
distress in the Ganga–Yamuna Doab 1800–1850.” In Grove, et al., eds., Nature
and the Orient.
Marks, R. B. 1998a. Tigers, Rice, Silk, and Silt. Cambridge University Press: New York.
Marks, R. B. 1998b. “‘It never used to snow’: Climatic variability and harvest yields
in late-imperial South China, 1650–1850”. In Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of
Time.
Matsuda Yoshirō. 1986. “Shindai no Kōka shisui kikō” [The structure of ﬂood control
on the Yellow River under the Qing dynasty]. Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 16.
Mei Zengliang [Boyan]. Qing. Bojian shanfang wenji [Collected works from the
Bojian Studio]. In Zhonghua wenshi congshu 12. Jinghua shuju: Taibei, 1968.
Menzies, N. 1988. “Trees, ﬁelds, and people: The forests of China from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries”. Ph.D. thesis, University of California,
Berkeley, Calif. Microﬁlm volume 8916794, U.M.I.: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1991.
Menzies, N. K. 1996. Forestry, vol. VI.3 of J. Needham, ed., Science and Civilisation
in China. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Menzies, N. K. 1998. “The villagers’ view of environmental history in Yunnan
province.” In Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.

542

Bibliography

Métailié, G. 1990. “Histoire naturelle et humanisme en Chine et en Europe au XVIe
siècle: Li Shizhen et Jacques Dalechamp.” Revue d’histoire des sciences XLIII.1.
Mitchell, L. and P. Rhodes (eds.). 1997. The Development of the Polis in Archaic
Greece. Routledge: London.
Morin, H. 1935. Entretiens sur le paludisme et sa prévention en Indochine.
Imprimerie d’Extrême-Orient: Hanoi.
Morita Akira. 1965. “Kōetsu ni okeru kaitō no suiri soshiki” [The hydraulic organization for sea-walls in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces]. Reprinted in Morita,
Researches on the History of Water Control under the Qing Dynasty.
Morita Akira. 1974. Shindai suirishi kenkyū [Researches on the history of water
control under the Qing dynasty]. Aki shobō: Tokyo.
Morita Akira. 1991. “Water control in Zhehdong during the later Ming.” Transl. M.
Elvin and K. Tamura, East Asian History 2 (Dec.).
Nakahara Teruo. 1959. “Shindai sōsen ni yoru shōhin ryūtsū ni tsuite” [The ﬂow of
commodities on grain-transport ships during the Qing dynasty]. Shigaku
kenkyū 72.
Nakayama Shigeru. 1974. Academic and Scientiﬁc Traditions in China, Japan, and
the West. Transl. J. Dusenbury, University of Tokyo Press: Tokyo, 1984.
[British] Naval Intelligence Division. 1945. China Proper, vol. 3. HMSO: Edinburgh.
Needham, J. with Wang Ling. 1959. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge.
Needham, J. with Wang Ling. 1965. Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4.II,
Mechanical engineering. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Needham, J. with Wang Ling and Lu Gwei-djen. 1971. Science and Civilisation in
China, vol. 4.III, Civil Engineering and Nautics. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
Obi Kōichi. 1963. Chūgoku bungaku ni aratawareta shizen to shizenkan [Nature and
the concept of nature in Chinese literature]. Iwanami shoten: Tokyo.
Ōki Yasushi. 1988. “Feng Menglong ‘Shan'ge’ no kenkyū” [Studies on the ‘Mountain Ditties’ of Feng Menglong]. Tōyō bunka kenkyūjo kiyō 105.
Osborne, A. 1989. “Barren mountains, raging rivers: The ecological and social
effects of changing land-use on the Lower Yangzi periphery in late-imperial
China.” Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University, New York. Microﬁlm volume
#9020586, U.M.I: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1991.
Pearce, F. 2000. “Tidal warming.” New Scientist 1.iv.
Perkins, D. 1969. Agricultural Development in China 1368–1968. Edinburgh University Press: Edinburgh.
Ping Heng. 1854. Sanjiangzha-wu quanshu xuke [Supplement to the Complete
Documents Relating to the Affairs of the Lock at Three Rivers’ Mouth ]. Prefaces of
1835 and 1836. See Cheng Mingjiu.
Polanyi, K. 1968. Primitive, Archaic and Modern Economies. G. Dalton, ed.
Doubleday: New York.
Pomeranz, K. 2002. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
Modern World Economy. Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.

Bibliography

543

Qian Ning, Xie Hanxiang, Zhou Zhide, and Li Guangbing. 1964. “Qiantang-jiang
hekou shakan-de jindai guocheng” [Fluvial processes in recent times of the
sandbar at the mouth of the Qiantang River {authors’ own translation}]. Dili
xuebao 30.2 (June).
Qiu Guangming. 1992. Zhongguo lidai du-liang-heng kao [Researches on measures
of length, capacity, and weight in the successive Chinese dynasties]. Kexue
chubanshe: Beijing.
Qu Dajun. 1700. Guangdong xinyu [New comments on Guangdong]. Reprinted,
Zhonghua shuju: Hong Kong, 1974.
Qu Tuiyan. 1964. Han Wei Liuchao fu xuan [Selected rhapsodies from the Han,
Wei, and Six Dynasties period]. Reprinted, Shanghai Guji chubanshe: Shanghai,
1979.
Radkau, J. 2000. Natur und Macht: Eine Weltgeschichte der Umwelt. Beck: München.
Reichert, V (ed.). 1946. Job. Bilingual text, Soncino Press: London.
Richardson, S. D. 1990. Forests and Forestry in China. Island Press: Washington
D.C.
Rickett, W. A. 1985. Guanzi: Political, Economic, and Philosophical Essays from Early
China. Vol. 1. Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.
Rickett, W. A. 1998. Guanzi: Political, Economic, and Philosophical Essays from Early
China. Vol. 2. Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.
Roddricks, J. V. 1992. Calculated Risks: The Toxicity and Human Health Risks of
Chemicals in our Environment. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Roetz, H. 1984. Mensch und Natur im alten China: Zum Subjekt-Objekt-Gegensatz
in der klassischen chinesischen Philosophie: Zugleich eine Kritik des Klischees vom
chinesischen Universismus. Lang: Frankfurt am Main.
Roetz, H. 2000. “On nature and culture in Zhou China.” Paper presented to the
conference at Rheine, March 2000, on “Understanding Nature in China and
Europe until the Eighteenth Century.” Unpublished.
Sakuma Kichiya. 1980. Gi Shin Nanboku-chō suiri-shi kenkyū [A study of the
history of water control under the Wei, the Jin and the Northern and Southern
Dynasties]. Kaimei shoin: n.p.
Satō Taketoshi. 1962. Chūgoku kodai kogyō-shi no kenkyū [Researches on industries
in ancient China]. Yoshikawa kōbunkan: Tokyo.
Shapiro, B. 1983. Probability and Certainty in Seventeenth-Century England: A Study
of the Relationships between Natural Science, Religion, History, Law, and Literature. Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.
Shen Yue. 492–3. Song shu [The history of the Song]. Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1974.
Sheng Honglang (ed.). 1991. Jianhu yu Shaoxing shuili [Mirror Lake and water
control in Shaoxing]. Zhongguo shudian: Beijing.
Sheng Hongyuan and Qiu Zhirong. 1991. “Woguo zuizao-de rengong yunhe zhi yi:
Shanyin gu shuidao” [One of the oldest man-made waterways in our land: The
old Shanyin canal]. In Sheng, ed., Mirror Lake and Water Control.
Shiba Yoshinobu. 1970. Commerce and Society in Sung China. Transl. M. Elvin,
Michigan University Center for Chinese Studies: Ann Arbor, Mich.

544

Bibliography

Shiba Yoshinobu. 1988. Sōdai Kōnan keizai-shi no kenkyū [Researches on the
economic history of Jiangnan under the Song]. Tōyō Daigaku Tōyō Bunka
Kenkyūjo: Tokyo.
Shima Kunio. 1958. Inkyo bokuji kenkyū [Researches on the divination texts from
the ruins of Yin]. Kyūko shoin: Tokyo.
Shirakawa Shizuka. 1972. Kōkotsubun no sekai [The world of the oracle bone
script]. Heibonsha: Tokyo.
Shirakawa Tadahisa. 1994. Tō Enmei to sono jidai [Tao Yuanming and his age].
Kembun shuppan: Tokyo.
Shuili shuidian kexue yanjiu-yuan and Wuhan shuili dianli xueyuan (eds.). 1979.
Zhongguo shuili-shi gao [Draft history of water control in China]. Shang and xia
only.
Skinner, G. W. 1977. “Regional urbanization in nineteenth-century China.” In G.
W. Skinner, ed., The City in Late Imperial China, Stanford University Press:
Stanford, Calif.
Song Zhenhao. 1994. Xia-Shang shehui shenghuo shi [Social life under the Xia and
Shang]. Zhongguo shehui kexue chubanshe: Beijing.
Su Dongpo [Su Shi]. Song. Su Dongpo quanji [Complete works of Su Dongpo].
Seven collections in 13 vols., Hanguo wenhua kanhanghui: Seoul, 1983.
Su Dongpo. 1097–1101. Dongpo Zhilin [Su Dongpo’s miscellany]. Reprinted in a
topical ordering, Zhonghua shuju: Beijing, 1981.
Su Shi. Song. Su Dongpoji [Collected works of Su Dongpo]. Shangwu yinshuguan: Shanghai, 1939.
Sugimoto Kenji. 1974. “Chūgoku kodai no mokuzai ni tsuite” [Timber in ancient
China]. Tōhō gakuhō (Mar.).
Sun, E-tu Zen. 1961. Ch’ing Administrative Terms: A Translation of the Terminology of
the Six Boards with Explanatory Notes. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass.
Sun Xiangping, et al. 1981. Zhongguo yan'an haiyang shuiwen qixiang gaikuang [An
outline of the hydrological patterns and weather of China’s coastal seas]. Kexue
chubanshe: Beijing.
Sung Ying-hsing [Song Yingxing]. Ming. T’ien-kung k’ai-wu. Chinese Technology
in the Seventeenth Century. Transl. E-tu Zen Sun and Shiou-chuan Sun, Pennsylvania State University Press: University Park, Penn., 1966.
Sutō Yoshiyuki. 1954. Chūgoku tochi-seido-shi kenkyū [Studies of land tenure
systems in China]. Tokyo University Press: Tokyo.
Swabe, J. 1999. Animals, Disease and Human Society: Human–Animal Relations and
the Rise of Veterinary Medicine. Routledge: London.
Tani Mitsutaka. 1991. Mindai Kakō-shi kenkyū [Studies on the hydraulics of the
Yellow River in the Ming dynasty]. Dōhōsha: Kyōto.
Thorp, J. 1937. ‘Soils’. In Buck, ed., Land Utilization in China.
Tian Wen. Qing. Qian shu [The book of Guizhou]. In Yan Yiping (Qing), ed.,
Yueya-tang congshu, case 36 in Baibu congshu jicheng [Collection of collections
on all topics], reprinted by Yiwen Yinshu-guan: Taibei, 1965–8, in 4145 vols.,
830 cases. The ‘::’ in citations indicates the number preceding is that of the
‘case’.

Bibliography

545

Tsuruma Kazuyuki. 1987. “Shōsuikyo Tokōen Teikokukyo wo tazunete: Shin
teikoku no keisei to Senkokuki no san daisuiri jigyō” [A visit to the Zhang river
canal, the Du river dike, and the Zheng Guo canal: On the formation of the Qin
empire and the three great hydraulic schemes of the Warring States period].
Chūgoku suiri shi kenkyū 17.
Tulishen. 1723. Yiyu lu [An account of unfamiliar lands]. Manchu/Chinese texts in
Imanishi Shunjū, ed., Jiaozhu yiyu lu, Tenri: n.p., 1964.
Tuotuo, et al. (eds.). Yuan. Jin shi [History of the Jin]. Reprinted, Zhonghua shuju:
Beijing, 1975.
Tuotuo, et al. (eds.). Yuan. Song shi [History of the Song]. Reprinted, Zhonghua
shuju: Beijing, 1977.
Ueda Makoto. 1999. Mori to midori no Chūgoku-shi: Ekorojikaru-hisutorii no kokoromi [Chinese history in terms of its forests and vegetation: A tentative essay in
ecological history]. Iwanami shoten: Tokyo.
Vermeer, E. 1987. “P’an Chi-hsün’s solutions for the Yellow River problems of the
late sixteenth century.” T’oung Pao LXXIII.
Vermeer, E. 1998. “Population and ecology along the frontier in Qing China.” In
Elvin and Liu, eds., Sediments of Time.
Von Zach, E. 1958. Die chinesische Anthologie: Übersetzungen aus dem Wen hsüan.
Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass.
Wagner, W. 1926. Die chinesische Landwirtschaft. Verlag Paul Parey: Berlin.
Waley, A. 1937. The Book of Songs. Allen and Unwin: London.
Wan Yansen. 1989. “Subei gu Huanghe sanjiaozhou-de yanbian” [Changes in the
old delta of the Yellow River in northern Jiangsu]. Haiyang yu huzhao 20.1.
Wang Chi-wu. 1961. The Forests of China, with a Survey of Grassland and Desert
Vegetation. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Mass.
Wang Shuizhao (ed.). 1984. Su Shi xuanji [An anthology from Su Shi (Dongpo)].
Shanghai guji chubanshe: Shanghai.
Wang Zhibin. 1980. “Huanghe wenti-de jidian kanfa—dui Wei.Jin.Nanbeichao”
[Some understanding of the issue of the Yellow River during the Wei, the Jin,
and the Northern and Southern Dynasties]. Renmin Huanghe 5.
Wang Zhibin. 1984. “Kaifeng Huanghe jueyi mantan” [A general discussion of the
breaking of the Yellow River dikes at Kaifeng]. Renmin Huanghe 4.
Waring, R. H. and S. W. Running. 1998. Forest Ecosystems: Analysis at Multiple
Scales. 2nd edn., Academic Press: San Diego, Calif.
Watabe Tadayo and Sakurai Yumio (eds.). 1984. Chūgoku Kōnan no inasaka bunka
[The rice culture of Jiangnan in China]. Nihon shōsō shuppan kyōkai: Tokyo.
Wen Huanran, et al. 1995. Zhongguo lishi shiqi zhiwu yu dongwu bianqian yanjiu
[Studies on changes in plants and animals in China during historical times].
Chongqing chubanshe: Chongqing.
Werner, E. T. C. 1932. Dictionary of Chinese Mythology. Reprinted, Julian Press: New
York, 1961.
Westbrook, F. A. 1972. “Landscape description in the lyric poetry and ‘Fuh on
Dwelling on the Mountains’ of Shieh Ling-yunn”. Ph.D. thesis, Yale University,
New Haven, Conn. Microﬁlm volume #7316410, U.M.I.: Ann Arbor, Mich., 1973.

546

Bibliography

Wiens, H. J. 1967. Han Chinese Expansion in South China, 2nd edn. [Originally
published as China’s March to the Tropics, 1954). Shoe String Press: Hamden, Conn.
Will, P. E. 1998. “Clear waters versus muddy waters: The Zheng-Bai irrigation
system of Shaanxi province in the late-imperial period.” In Elvin and Liu, eds.,
Sediments of Time.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1931. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft Chinas. Harrassowitz: Leipzig.
Wittfogel, K. A. 1957. Oriental Despotism. Yale University Press: New Haven, Conn.
Wu Qihua [Wu Chi-hua]. 1970. “Huanghe zai Mingdai gaidao qianxi hejue
Zhangqiu-de niandai” [On the date of the breach at Zhangqiu just prior to the
change of course of the Yellow River in the Ming dynasty]. In Wu Qihua, ed.,
Mingdai shehui jingji shiluncong [Collected historical essays on the society and
economy of the Ming dynasty]. Taiwan xuesheng shuju: Taibei.
Wu Zhenyu. Nineteenth century. Yangjizhai conglu [Collected records from the
Yangjizhai Studio]. Printed from the MS, Zhejiang guji chubanshe: Hangzhou,
1985.
Xie Qiyi. 2000. “Wudai ci-zhong-de ‘shan’ yixiang yanjiu” [The conceptional
representation of the ‘mountain’ in the lyric songs of the Five Dynasties].
Master’s thesis, National Taiwan Normal University: Taibei.
Xu Hailiang. 1990. “Huanghe xiayou-de duiji lishi fazhan qushi” [The history and
trend of development of the sedimentary deposits in the lower reaches of the
Yellow River]. Zhongguo shuili xuebao 7.
Xu Jinxiong. 1988. Zhongguo gudai shehui [Ancient Chinese society]. Taiwan
shangwu yinshuguan: Taibei.
Yabuuchi Kiyoshi (ed.). 1967. Sō-Gen jidai kagaku gijutsu [Science and technology
in the Song and Yuan period]. Jimbun kagaku kenkyūjo: Kyoto.
Yabuuchi Kiyoshi. 1974. Chūgoku bummei no keisei [The formation of Chinese civilization]. Tokyo: Iwanami.
Yamada Keiji. 1967. “Sōdai no shizen tetsugaku: Sōgaku ni okeru no ichi ni tsuite”
[The Song philosophy of nature: Its place in Song learning]. In Yabuuchi, ed.,
Science and Technology in the Song and Yuan Period.
Yan Bao (arra. and annot.). 1993. Hxak Lul Hxak Ghot: Miaozu guge [Hxak Lul Hxak
Ghot. Ancient songs of the Miao race]. Guizhou minzu chubanshe: Guiyang.
Yang Kuan. 1993. Zhongguo gudai ducheng zhidu shi yanjiu [Researches in the
history of the systems of the capital cities of Chinese antiquity]. Shanghai guji
chubanshe: Shanghai.
Yang Qiqiao. 1981. Yongzheng-di ji qi mizhe zhidu yanjiu [The Yongzheng emperor
and his system of secret memorials]. Sanlian shuju: Hong Kong.
Yang Tongsheng, et al. (eds.). 1985. Hxat Khat: Kaiqin ge [Hxat Khat: Songs on the
occasion of the formation of alliances through marriage]. Guizhou-sheng
minzu yanjiu-suo: Guizhou.
Yang Xiaoneng. 2000. Reﬂections of Early China: Decor, Pictographs, and Pictorial
Inscriptions. Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art with the University of Washington
Press: Seattle, Wash.
Yao Hanyuan. 1991. “Zhedong yunhe-shi kaolüe” [A summary of a historical investigation into the Zhedong Canal]. In Sheng, ed., Mirror Lake and Water Control.
