A GEOLOGY OF MEDIA

In Principles of Geology, Charles Lyell offers one of the early definitions
of the discipline:
Geology is the science which investigates the successive changes
that have taken place in the organic and the inorganic kingdoms of
nature; it enquires into the causes of these changes, and the influence which they have exerted in modifying the surface and external
structure of the planet.1

This iconic take from 1830 outlines geology as one of the main disciplines
of planetary inquiry, leaving the regime of morals to the humanities. It is
both an emblem of the division of labor in the academia and a genealogical record that could not be more central to our concerns. The geological manifests in earthquakes, mass extinction of species, pollution of the
globe, and the debates about the Anthropocene, which demonstrates
that morals, culture, and geology after all have something to do with each
other. The book argues that the world of thought, senses, sensation, perception, customs, practices, habits, and human embodiment is not unrelated to the world of geological strata, climates, the earth, and the massive
durations of change that seem to mock the timescales of our petty affairs.
And yet, the human affairs have demonstrated an impact. Science and
engineering has a significant impact on the earth. The idealized object of
knowledge itself registers the observing gaze that was supposed to be at
a distance. Geoengineering is one practice of intertwined naturecultures,
vii





and our continuous trespassing over the boundaries of sciences and
humanities cannot be neglected by closing our eyes and thinking of semiotics. The relations to the earth are also part of the social relations of
labor and exploitation that characterized emerging industrial capitalism
of the nineteenth century as much as they characterize contemporary
digital capitalism of the twenty-­first century from mining minerals, geopolitics of the hunt for energy, and material resources to the factories of
production of computational equipment.
This short book is about scientific cultures, technological reality, and
artistic perspectives. It engages with science and technology as one pertinent multidisciplinary context for media studies and media art history.
It does not claim to be a full-­fledged account of the relations of geology
and technology. However, it offers an insight relevant to many of us work­
ing in the field of media, arts, and contemporary technology studies, including media archaeology.
There is more mining than data mining in A Geology of Media. More
specifically, it is interested in the connections of media technologies, their
materiality, hardware, and energy, with the geophysical nature: nature
affords and bears the weight of media culture, from metals and minerals
to its waste load. The official Geological Surveys might be an odd place
to start media analysis, but they do reveal the backstory of technological culture: the geopolitically important scientific mapping of resources
from copper to uranium, oil to nickel, bauxite (necessary for aluminum) to
a long list of rare earth minerals. One also finds a mix of nation-­state inter­
ests, scientific institutions, and, of course, military needs ever so tightly
interlinked since the nineteenth century. One is led to consider the systematic laboratorization of everyday culture: even the mundane is produced through a mix of the archaic underworld and the refined scientific
process. Even if cultural and media theorists are now aware of the importance of minerals such as coltan (tantalum), it was actually already before
digital culture that this specific mineral (often mined in the war-­ridden
territories of Congo) became mapped as part of the geophysical politics
of the twentieth century: “The U.S. Bureau of Mines observed that these
materials were ‘among the rare metals most vital in 1952 to the United
States defense program’”2 because of tantalum’s (and columbium’s) usefulness for special “high-­strength steel alloys.”3



The book was finished primarily in Istanbul in 2013 and early 2014, a
city where one has a privileged view to some of the issues that we face
with technological projects and disastrous environmental consequences.
Such are often underpinned by shortsighted and just blatantly exploitative violent politics. The story, and the book, was started during the
Gezi protests of summer 2013, sparked off by an environmental protest
but resonant of a wider political situation where issues of capitalism, religion, technology, knowledge, and the environment folded into a complex
historical event. Istanbul is a tectonic city, sitting on top of geological
for­mations promising another major earthquake in the future. It is a city
branded by massive geologically significant building projects. Some are
already ready, some are in planning. The recently opened Marmaray tunnel connected the two continents through a tunnel under the Bosphorus;
a canal project suggests to link the Black Sea with the Marmara Sea; a lot
of the projects are reminiscent of the national engineering of modernity
but also now the corporate capital investment in this geopolitically impor­
tant region. But the protests were also highlighting the aspects that tie
location to politics, the life of the earth with increasingly authoritarian rul­
ing powers with corporate interests in the construction business and other
businesses. The events demonstrated the impossibility of detaching the
political from the natural, the geopolitical from the geological. The short-­
term political struggles had to do with political freedoms as much as with
the awareness of what would happen if some of the massive building pro­
jects, including a new airport and a third bridge, would wipe out impor­
tant parts of the forestry around Istanbul as well as creating extremely
dangerous risks to the underground water resources of the city.
This political situation and its link with capitalism was present already
in the nineteenth-­century evaluation of the changing modes of production. Of course the environmental catastrophe is not merely a capitalist
aftereffect. We should not ignore the impact “real socialism” of the twentieth century left in the natural record as radioactive radiation and industrial traces in soil and rivers. But there is a connection to the capitalist
intensification of modes of production with the necessity to expand into
new resource bases to guarantee growth. What we now perceive as the
environmental catastrophe at times branded as the “Anthropocene” of
human impact on the planet matches in some periodization also what


Marx and Engels narrativize as a crucial political economic shift. From
The Communist Manifesto, in 1848:
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce 100 years, has created
more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all
preceding generations together. Subjection of nature’s forces to
man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-­
navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of
whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground—­what earlier century had even
a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of
social labour?4

Marx and Engels’s political characterization of capitalism as a mode of
mobilizing science and engineering into productive forces is also what
now we live as the aftereffect coined the “Anthropocene.” The modern
project of ruling over nature understood as resource was based on a
division of the two—­the Social and the Natural—­but it always leaked.
Bruno Latour constantly has reminded of the impossibility of dividing
Nature from Culture. We have various names for the entanglements of
the natural–­geophysical, including Gaia and the Anthropocene; but both
indicate the arrival of something new that points out as insufficient any
Modern attempt to name the two, Nature and Culture, separately.5
Yet we need to remember that nothing necessarily arrived. The geological past in its persistent slowness; the earlier accounts of the Anthropocene before its time in the nineteenth century by Antonio Stoppani
(the Anthropozoic) and by George P. Marsh;6 the early phases of the scientific and technological systems, such as metereology, that visualized
and modeled the natural planet as a global system—­they were already
there.7 In 1873, in his Corso di Geologia, Stoppani paints an image of
the human as an inventor who penetrates the earth, the sea, and the air
with his technologies and builds from and on the earth’s already existing
strata.8 The future fossil layer is already in Stoppani’s analysis branded by
human technological and chemical traces. Humans leave their mark, and
the earth carries it forward as an archive.
The supposedly unexpected event of the Anthropocene had already
arrived beforehand. These sudden revelations embedded in geological


slowness offer a view both to the historical layers of discourse concerning technology, waste, and time and the geological realities where we collect and dispose of resources. Stoppani’s vision of the earth archive is the
afterglow of the scientific and technological culture. It’s the trash in midst
of which we live. And it’s the trash we have to sort out in case there would
be a human future, in the midst of our constitutive nonhuman fellows.



1
MATERIALITY
GROUNDS OF MEDIA
AND CULTURE
The future is out there on the permafrost.
—­T HOMAS PYNCHON, THE BLEEDING EDGE

Technology . . . constitutes the abyss of the Anthropocene.
—­E RICH HÖRL

An Alternative Media Materialism
To label yourself a materialist does not necessarily by itself mean much.
The term is something that demands explication, instead of explaining by
its own powers. The long histories of materialism and idealism in philosophy are one reference point, but so are the everyday uses of the term:
do we refer to it as the opposite of spiritual or ethical (as in expressions
of disgust toward the materialist aspects of consumer society) or refer
to the reality of machines and technology that structure our life. The
Marxist legacy in political thought and theory has given us indication
what historical materialism is, but so have scholars in media theory:
media materialism refers to the necessity to analyze media technologies
as some­thing that are irreducible to what we think of them or even how
we use them. It has come to refer to technology as an active agent in the
ontological and epistemological sense. In other words, media structure
how things are in the world and how things are known in the world. In
fact, media analysis is an excellent way of “giving material specificity to
1

2  Materiality

our descriptions of . . . abstract concepts”1 of which materiality is oddly
enough too easily one.
Cultural and media theory have benefited in the past years from an
emergence of several accounts of materiality. In media theory, materialism has often been attached to the term German media theory—­a term
that has brought unity to a wider field of scholars engaging with material
accounts of media culture in rather different ways.2 Friedrich Kittler is
the most famous reference in this context. Kittler inaugurated various
provocations regarding computer culture, hardware, and the technological framing of our contemporary life, which implied a certain nonhuman
perspective: the human being is primarily a “so-­called Man” formed as
an aftereffect of media technologies. At times, Kittler was even branded
a media archaeologist because he picked up on Michel Foucault’s archaeological and archival cultural history in a new way in his early work.3
There’s a truth to that label: Kittler was adamant that we need to make
sure that Foucault’s understanding of what governs our contemporary
life—­its archive—­is not only about the statements and rules found in
books and libraries. Instead, it is to be found in technological networks
of machines and institutions, patterns of education and drilling: in the
sci­entific-­engineering complex that practices such forms of power that the
traditional humanities theory is incapable of understanding or grasping
if it continues to talk about hermeneutic meanings or persists to operate
with traditional sociological concepts. Kittler was a provocateur in a theo­
retical psy-­ops operation who believed that humanities scholars should
work with technology. He himself did. Kittler left behind unpublished writ­
ings but also software manuals and hardware, to be part of his Nachlass.
His early synthesizer from the 1970s was resurrected and included in an
art performance by Jan-­Peter Sonntag to demonstrate this metamorphosis of Kittler: the Goethe scholar turned synth-­geek and tinkerer.
At times in accusing, pejorative ways, and at times in more celebratory tones, the likes of Kittler became an emblem of media materialism:
to study media, you need to have a proper understanding of the science
and engineering realities that govern the highly fine-­structured computer
worlds in which we live—­without ignoring the fact that technical media
did not start with the digital. Older technical media play an important part
in the histories and genealogies, the archaeological layers conditioning
Materiality  3

our present. Media archaeology has been one field to constantly emphasize this point.
For Kittler, media studies was never to be reduced to the play of
interpretations, semiotic connotations, or modes of representation, which
were only secondary effects, second-­order phenomena. Media work on
the level of circuits, hardware, and voltage differences, which the engineers as much as the military intelligence and secret agencies gradually
recognized before humanities did. This mode of argumentation ignored,
however, a wide range of politically engaged work that tried to make sense
of why media govern us humans on a semiotic level too. Such creeping
suspicions that any inclusive account of materiality definitely filtered out
many competing ones triggers the question, what is being left out? What
other modes of materiality deserve our attention? Issues of gender, sex,
embodiment, and affect? Of labor, global logistics, modes of production?
In other words, from where do our notions of materiality stem, and what
is their ground?
What if there is another level of media materialism that is not so
easily dismissed as we would think? What if media materialism is not
something that hones in on the machines only? Where do machines come
from, what composes technology in its materiality and media after it becomes disused, dysfunctional dead media that refuse to die? This book
is structured around the argument that there is such a thing as geology of
media: a different sort of temporal and spatial materialism of media culture than the one that focuses solely on machines or even networks of
technologies as nonhuman agencies. It echoes John Durham Peters’s point
that the axis of time and space—­familiar also from the Canadian media
theory tradition of Harold Innis and Marshall McLuhan—­is not restricted
to traditional ideas about media as devices but can refer back to cosmology and geology: that the geological sciences and astronomy have already
opened up the idea of the earth, light, air, and time as media.4
This is a green book—­in the sense of referring to the ecological contexts in which we should make arguments about media technological
culture—­as well as a book covered in dirt and soil. Instead of leafy metaphors of animals, technology, and ecosystems, it insists on a particular
aspect of this relation between media and the geophysical environment.
Scholars such as Douglas Kahn have recently made the same point that

4  Materiality

Kittler’s agenda could have been more radical and continued from the
circuits to what enables hardware: the environmental contexts, questions
of energy consumption, and, one could add, the electronic waste that surround our contemporary worries of what transmission, calculation, and
storage mean in a material context.5
The guiding conceptual ground of this book refers to geology: the
science about the ground beneath our feet, its history and constitution,
the systematic study of the various levers, layers, strata, and intercon­
nections that define the earth. It implies the work of geoengineering and
geotechnics as specific ways of interacting with the solidity of the earth
but also the fine measurements that relate to a wider awareness of the
environmental constitution of our lives. Hence geology is not only about
the soil, the crust, the layers that give our feet a ground on which to stumble: geology is also a theme connected to the climate change as well as
the political economy of industrial and postindustrial production. It connects to the wider geophysical life worlds that support the organic life
as much as the technological worlds of transmission, calculation, and
storage. Geology becomes a way to investigate materiality of the technological media world. It becomes a conceptual trajectory, a creative intervention to the cultural history of the contemporary.
Geology and various related disciplines and fields of knowledge,
such as chemistry and, indeed, ecology, frame the modern world and give
it one possible scientific structure. Such disciplines are strongly implied
in the emergence of the technological and scientific culture, which feeds
to our media cultural practices. It is in this sense that I am interested in
finding strains of media materialism outside the usual definition of media:
instead of radio, I prefer to think what components and materials enable
such technologies; instead of networking, we need to remember the importance of copper or optical fiber for such forms of communication;
instead of a blunt discussion of “the digital,” we need to pick it apart and
remember that also mineral durations are essential to it being such a crucial feature that penetrates our academic, social, and economic interests.
Consider, then, lithium as such a premediatic media material that is essen­
tial to the existence of technological culture but also as an element that
traverses technologies. This chemical element (Li) and metal is essential
for laptop batteries as well as future green technologies (again, battery

Materiality  5

technology, but for hybrid cars). Platinum-grouped metals might be famil­
iar from jewelry but are as important for “computer hard drives, liquid
crystal displays, and miniaturized electronic circuits”6 as for hydrogen
fuel cells. Lots of critical materials are in a crucial position in relation to
a variety of civilian and military technologies, including what we tend to
call just bluntly “media”: screens, networks, computers, and more. Tracking chemicals, metals, and minerals is one aspect of this book, extending
traditional notions of media materialism into a more environmental and
ecological agenda.
Artist Robert Smithson spoke about “abstract geology,” referring to
how tectonics and geophysics pertain not only to the earth but also to the
mind; abstract geology is a field where a geological interest is distributed
across the organic and nonorganic division. Its reference to the “abstract”
might attract those with a Deleuzian bent and resonate with the concept of “abstract machines.” But before the philosophical discourse,
Smithson’s interest was in the materiality of the art practice, reintroducing metals (and hence geology) to the studio. What’s more, Smithson was
ready to mobilize his notion emerging in the artistic discourse of land
art in the 1960s to a conceptualization of technology that we can say was
nothing less than anti-­McLuhanian: instead of seeing technology as exten­
sions of Man, technology is aggregated and “made of the raw materials of
the earth.”7 From our current twenty-­first-­century perspective approximately fifty years later, it starts an imaginary alternative media theoretical lineage that does not include necessarily McLuhan, Kittler, and the
likes in its story but materials, metals, waste, and chemistry. These materials articulate the high-­technical and low-­paid culture of digitality. They
also provide an alternative materialism for the geophysical media age.
So how does a media theorist turned pseudo-­geologist operate? To
where does such a hybrid and hyphenated scholar turn? At least in this
book, this leads us to track the importance of the nonorganic in constructing media before they become media: the literal deep times and
deep places of media in mines and rare earth minerals. It looks at aesthetic discourses and practices, such as psychogeophysics—­a sort of
speculative aesthetics for the connection of technology and society with
a special view to the geophysical—­that offer insights to earth media arts.8
The amount of material would be endless if one were to start looking

6  Materiality

meticulously at the work of national institutions and geological methods.
Geological surveys have moved on from the early work contributing to
agriculture and mining to being an essential part of global geopolitics.
One can track specific genealogies of geology, politics, and technology
even through single institutions, such as the influential scientific agency
the U.S. Geological Survey.9 Since its founding in the latter half of the
nineteenth century, it has served an essential role in mapping the necessary natural resources part of nation building into a technologically
advanced country—­and now, one can see how the role has widened to a
global scale; for instance, in Afghanistan, in parallel to the military operations of the war against terrorism, geologists are mapping the resource
basis of the country. It promises, besides copper, iron, and gold, also
lithium—­even enough for Afghanistan to be branded the “Saudi Arabia
of lithium.” Old geological surveys and methods are being complemented
with aerial surveys by geologists collaborating with the Pentagon by using
new gravity and magnetic measuring techniques.10
To summarize the preceding preamble, this is a book about technical
media culture—­digital and analog—­that starts from the geophysical. It
investigates, employs, and mobilizes terms that refer to the geophysical—­
that is, not just geopolitical—­spheres of media culture in a manner that
is a combination of conceptually speculative but thematically and media
historically grounded. In other words, a part of the book works through
historical sources and examples, but with an emphasis on media arts.
Indeed, it is the lens of media art practices and theoretical discourse that
offers us a specific way to look at the recent years of climate change, the
Anthropocene, and geophysics-­embedded work: the ideas about deep
time of the media,11 psychogeophysics, e-­waste, the Anthropocene, chem­
istry, and the earthly as a media history that works in nonlinear ways.
This idea of media (art) histories as one of nonlinear strata pushes even
the media archaeological agenda of media history to its extreme. Human
history is infused in geological time.12
Temporality and Medianatures
Among the variety of theories and methods in media studies debates
of the past years, media archaeology has become a way to multiply and
bend traditional media historical methods to incorporate new ways of

Materiality  7

grasping the history of oddities, losers, and, more generally, conditions
of media culture. It maps the real imaginary of how fantasies of media
become part of the real technological projects and how media aesthetics
contributes to new forms of political design of culture. Media archaeological writings from Erkki Huhtamo to Wolfgang Ernst, Friedrich Kittler
to Siegfried Zielinski, Thomas Elsaesser and many others have offered an
exciting tool kit that expands what we even think of as media technologies.13 But media theory relates to notions of temporality as well: the various different approaches are not only about material objects but how we
think of (media cultural) temporality—­media time that is recurring and
based on topoi; the idea of deep times that will be addressed and radicalized in this book; the focus on microtemporalities that define technical
media culture on the level of machines and technological processes; the
recursive methodology of time and the expansions of new film history
into media archaeology in ways that offer new sets of questions and bootstrap a new sense of media historical time. All of these are examples of
media archaeology as executed media philosophies of time, which offer
an important subcurrent to thinking about materiality.
In Wolfgang Ernst’s media archaeology and media archaeography,
the focus is on microtemporalities and time-­critical aspects of especially
computational media. Ernst’s focus on the agency of the machine as a
temporal regime that forces a reconsideration of media historical macronarratives works in alternative ways. The methodological mode of media
history based on writing has to encounter the specific Eigenzeit14 of the
machine: how technological culture and its specific instance in machines
are not just in time but also fabricate time. The revolution speeds of hard
drives, clock times of computers, network pings, and so forth are examples of the temporalities in which machines themselves are embedded
and which they impose on the human social world. Machines don’t just
write narratives: they calculate. In Ernst’s words, the difference between
this sort of media archaeology and media history is this: “A computing
culture, from a media-­archaeological view, deals not with narrative mem­
ory but with calculating memory—­counting rather than recounting, the
archaeological versus the historical mode.”15
But then there is the other pole of extremely long durations. As we
engage with in more detail in chapter 2, Zielinski’s adoption of the concept

8  Materiality

of deep time to media art discourse has offered a way to think and operate like a geologist of media art culture. For Zielinski, this concept has
been a way to bypass the short-­term “psychopathological” capitalist
media discourse to understand that the interactions between media, art,
and science have long roots. Indeed, Zielinski was after ways of modu­
lating seeing and hearing before we historically rather recently thought
to call them media.16
In stories of inventions by Empedocles, Athanasius Kircher, and many
others, Zielinski uncovers the layered history that offers a way to engage
with the past that is suddenly animated in front of our eyes and more
alive than the repetitious advertising-­based digital media innovations.
Zielinski’s deep time is a methodology that bypasses the narrative of definite origins and is interested in the quirky variations within media history. There is an archaeological urge to dig out the uncovered, the surprising, the anomalous, and in Zielinski’s hands, this digging takes on the
geological and paleontological concepts. But what if this notion based in
geological time needs further radicalization? Indeed, what if we should
think more along the lines of Manuel Delanda’s proposition of thousands
of years of nonlinear history and expand to a geology of media art history:
thousands, millions of years of “history” of rocks, minerals, geophysics,
atmospheric durations, earth times, which are the focus of past decades of
intensive epistemological inquiry and practical exploitation as resources—­
things we dig from the (under)ground, the harnessing of the atmosphere
and the sky for signal transmissions, the outer space for satellites and
even space junk, as a new extended geological “layer” that circles our
planet, like Trevor Paglen reminds us in his photographic performance/
installation The Last Pictures, which takes place in the orbit around the
Earth17 (see Figure 1; see also chapter 5). If the emergence of industrialization since the nineteenth century and the molding of the environment
with mines, smelting facilities, and sulfur dioxide from coal energy was
addressed by poets who either in adoring ways or critically narrativized
the dramatic aesthetic and ecological change, our contemporary technological arts do similar work, although often also engaging directly with
the material world of geophysics in their practice.
This geophysical media world manifests itself in contemporary arts.
This book covers examples of projects from Paglen to microresearchlab

Materiality  9

Figure 1. Trevor Paglen, Spacecraft in Perpetual Geosynchronous Orbit, 35,786 km above
Equator, 2010 (detail, part 2 of diptych). The artist was also interested in orbital technologies as an extension of the geologic in his earlier Artifacts series. Courtesy of the artist;
Metro Pictures, New York; Altman Siegel, San Francisco; Galerie Thomas Zander, Cologne.

(Berlin), from technological fossil installations to the work of earthquake
sonification. Indeed, sound is one way to characterize the deep time media
aesthetics and its epistemological background. The earth roars and has a
sound. It was something realized already in the 1950s when Emory D.
Cooke released his Out of This World vinyl LP containing earthquake
soundscapes18 and then later by media artists as well as theorists such as
Kittler. The following quotation from Kittler illustrates that with the tech­
nologies of time-­axis manipulation, also the long duration slowness of
geophysics—­often too slow, or otherwise working in frequencies inaudible and invisible for human perception—­becomes part of our aesthetic
experience:
Take an earthquake like the one in Kobe with thousands of casualties, seismographically record its inaudible slow vibrations, replay
10  Materiality
the signals of the entire horrific day in ten seconds—­and a sound
will emerge. In the case of earthquakes that, like those in the Pacific,
result from the clash of two tectonic plates, the sound will resemble
a high-­pitched slap, in the case of those that, like those in the Atlantic, are the result of the drifting apart of two continental plates, it
will, conversely, sound like a soft sigh. Thus, the spectrum, that is, a
frequency composition, gives the violent events timbre or quality:
America becomes Asia. A short time ago I was privileged to hear the
timbre of such quakes and I will not forget it for the rest of my life.19

Geophysics was already earlier adopted as part of the aesthetic practices and vocabularies of the avant-­garde. With a meticulous documen­
tation with a special emphasis on the electromagnetic, Douglas Kahn
demonstrates how this connection of the earth and the avant-­garde composers ranged from Alvin Lucier’s experiments to Pauline Oliveros’s Sono­
spheres. Electronic music studios became allies with nature—­or at times
also demonstrated the obsolescence before their time of even having the
need for an electronic music studio: it’s all existing already, in our brains,
in nature.20 An aesthetics that comes from the vibrations of nature is a
theme running through certain Deleuzian-­inspired accounts—­foremost
among them Elizabeth Grosz’s21—­but it is also a way to tap into the geophysical as an affordance for what we call “media.” Indeed, no wonder
that we can summon the ideas of such physical nature like the Schumann
resonances—­a concept that “ties low-­frequency electromagnetic resonances of the entire earth”22 with New Age discourse: the earth is a living entity with a specific frequency range. This obviously is one variation
of the more scientific arguments for the Gaia hypothesis, which offers
one important background for any conceptualization of the earth, of life,
and which was preceded by the much older idea of terra mater: “From
classical antiquity to the eighteenth century it was widely believed that
stones and metals grow beneath the earth like organic matter.”23
But still in our scientific worldview, the idea of organic and nonorganic life entwined resurfaces. In poetic words of paleontologists such as
Richard Fortey—­“life made the surface of the Earth what it is, even while
it was Earth’s tenant”24—­we must underline the interaction of biological
and physical determinants in molding the planet. We can also extend to
a realization that pertains to cultural reality and media cultural practices


Materiality  11

and techniques. Such are earth’s tenants, and yet effectively contributing
to the way in which the planet is being seen, used, and modified. We need
to be aware how carefully grafted concepts are able to catch the variety of
practices that work across traditional disciplines and connect issues of
nature and culture. The effect of the planet earth as seen from space since
late 1960s space travel started demonstrates how visual media contribute
to scientific concepts. The planetary vision—­of a holistic organism as
much as an object of military and scientific technologies of transportation and visualization—­was part of why scientists from James Lovelock
to Lynn Margulis contributed to the wider discussions of feedback mechanisms. But it also signaled a shift from James Hutton’s Theory of the
Earth (1788) to media of the earth, executed by means of technologies
and media—­of visualization techniques revealing the earthrise from the
moon but also the galaxy from new perspectives. What’s more, the trip
to the moon included the Apollo lunar module bringing back geological
samples,25 a dream not altogether disappeared: the promise of mining
helium-­3 important for another energy revolution could be seen only as
a natural continuation of the planetary politics of nation-­states and corporations such as Google into interplanetary dimensions.26 Such speculative accounts have even spoken of Russian moon colonies established
by 2030 as part of the current geopolitical race for resources.27
The mediated vision turned back on the earth itself was instru­mental
to a whole new range of social and scientific agendas. Visions of the earth
from the moon since the 1960s but also the technological gaze toward
deep space with Hubble were never just about space and its interplanetary objects but as much about mapping such entities as part of the corporate and national interest. Geographical surveys benefited from the
developed lenses and image processing of satellite-­enabled remote sensing.28 The perspective back to the globe has prompted the existence of
corporate maps such as Google Earth and a massive military surveillance
system too. And in ecological contexts, it enabled a way to capture the
Gaia concept’s force as a way to understand the various layers where the
biological and the geophysical mix. In Bruce Clarke’s words,
from the co-­evolution of living systems with the totality of their
terrestrial environment, Gaia emerged as a meta-­system of planetary self-­regulation maintaining viable conditions of atmospheric


12  Materiality
composition, temperature, oceanic pH and salinity, and of the global
distribution of organic nutrients such as nitrogen, sulfur, and potassium. The biosphere performs like any living organism with a complement of homeostatic feedback mechanisms for maintaining
geophysiological functions at healthy levels. Gaia theory is an indispensable framework for thinking about global climate change because it is only by recognizing Gaia’s multi-­systemic self-­regulation
that we can fully understand what we are now facing—­the imminent failure of those regulating systems.29

From systems emblematic of the post–­World War II cybernetic culture to earthquakes: what might be an unforgettable aesthetic experience
for a German media theorist is an important epistemological framework
for geophysical research. Such media and aesthetic methods prepare the
earth to become knowable and intelligible. I want to underline the following argument: there is a double bind between the relations of media
technologies and the earth conceived as a dynamic sphere of life that cuts
across the organic and the nonorganic. It is also increasingly framed as
standing reserve in the Heideggerian vocabulary: a resource for exploitation, and viewed as resource, ordered to present itself.30 This is where
dynamics of vibrant life meet with the corporate realities of technologized
capitalism that is both a mode of exploitation and an epistemological
framework.
Our relations with the earth are mediated through technologies and
techniques of visualization, sonification, calculation, mapping, prediction,
simulation, and so forth: it is through and in media that we grasp earth
as an object for cognitive, practical, and affective relations. Geological
resources used to be mapped through surveys and field observation, now
through advanced remote sensing technologies.31 They are in a way exten­sions of Leibniz’s universal calculus, which offered one way to account
for the order of the earth, including its accidents like earthquakes (such
as the infamous 1755 in Lisbon). But as Eyal Weizmann suggests, this calculation of the earth is now less divine and more about the “increasingly
complex bureaucracy of calculations that include sensors in the subsoil, terrain, air, and sea, all processed by algorithms and their attendant
models.”32 Similarly, practices of meteorology are mediatic techniques that

Materiality  13

give a sense of the dynamics of the sky;33 geology is an excavation into the
earth and its secrets that affords a view not only to the now-­moment that
unfolds into a future potential of exploitation but also to the past buried
under our feet. Depth becomes time. A tape recorder tracks the slow roar
of the earthquake—­like already in the 1950s practices of measurement,
fascinating in regard to the effects of nuclear detonations as well as earthquake trembles, making them a media object: “Through the tape recorder,
earthquakes and explosions became portable and repeatable.”34 In some
ways, we can also say that this means the portability and repeatability of
the Real: the geophysical that becomes registered through the ordering of
media reality.35
And conversely, it is the earth that provides for media and enables it:
the minerals, materials of(f ) the ground, the affordances of its geophysical reality that make technical media happen. Besides the logic of ordering, we have the materiality of the uncontained, and the providing, that is
constantly in tension with the operations of framing. This double bind—­
which I call the sphere of medianatures—­is the topic of this book, with a
special focus on geology and the geophysical.
Despite some references, I am not really opting for the Heideggerian route, however useful his comments on standing reserve and ordering might be. Instead, medianatures is a variation on Donna Haraway’s
famous and influential concept of naturecultures.36 The term is for Haraway a way to understand the inherently interconnected nature of the
two terms that in Cartesian ontology were separated across the field of
the infamous binaries: nature versus culture, mind versus matter, and
so on. In Haraway’s terms, we are dealing with a more entangled set of
practices in which it is impossible to decipher such spheres separately.
Instead, naturecultures implies the ontological need to take into account
the co-­constituted relationships in which
none of the partners pre-­exist the relating, and the relating is never
done once and for all. Historical specificity and contingent mutability
rule all the way down, into nature and culture, into naturecultures.37

This topological conceptualization that remains sensitive to “his­
torical specificity” is an important way to talk about the related notions
of “material-­semiotic” and “material-­discursive” spheres as underlined in



14  Materiality

recent new materialism.38 Medianatures is meant to incorporate a similar drive but with a specific emphasis on (technical) media culture. It is a
concept that crystallizes the “double bind” of media and nature as co-­
constituting spheres, where the ties are intensively connected in material nonhuman realities as much as in relations of power, economy, and
work. Indeed, it is a regime constituted as much by the work of micro-­
organisms, chemical components, minerals, and metals as by the work of
underpaid laborers in mines or in high-­tech entertainment device component production factories, or people in Pakistan and China sacrificing their health for scraps of leftover electronics. Medianatures is a useful
concept only when it scales down to the specific instances of material-­
discursive events.
Ties and relations of medianature are often revealed in some of the
extreme contexts of exploitation and environmental damage. Electronic
waste, resource depletion, and globally unevenly distributed relations of
labor are such instances where art vocabularies turn to medianatures.
This is a refashioning of the underground from avant-­garde to geology,
geophysics, and political economy. To use Sean Cubitt’s words referring
to planned obsolescence: “the digital realm is an avant-­garde to the extent
that it is driven by perpetual innovation and perpetual destruction.”39
The underground is another important topographical site for geology of media (arts). The underground is the place of hell—­itself defined
in Western mythology by its chemistry: the smell of sulfur, and the killing
poisons of carbon dioxide, which is why since Virgil’s Aeneid the Underworld is marked by death to any animal approaching it.40 The underground is at the crux of technological imaginary of modernity—­a place
of technological futures since the nineteenth century as well as the artistic avant-­garde outside the mainstream.41 Going underground happens
in spy stories as well as in postapocalyptic scenarios, whether earlier
ones such as Gabriel Tarde’s The Underground Man (1904/1905)42 or
post–­World War II nuclear anxiety. Lewis Mumford sees mining and the
underground as ideal cases to understand modern technology: he names
this turn toward nonorganic technological nature as paleotechnics. It
starts so in the foundational scenes of modern capitalism, where mining
is inherently linked to projects demanding extensive amounts of capital,
as well as itself enabling the further buildup of significant technological


Materiality  15

industries. Scenes of burrowing down to the earth and digging penetrate
now also the urban sphere in constant upheaval, a constant rebuilding
and opening of depths. Rosalind Williams points this out: “Between the
late 1700s and early 1900s, the ground of Britain and Europe was dug up
to lay the foundations of a new society. Subterranean images became
familiar sights during that period: workers sinking picks into the soil,
city streets slashed down the middle, whole industrial regions turned
into minelike terrains.”43 A new infrastructural world was born, one that
recircuits as part of the contemporary planetary moment, which weaves
together labor and the earth.
For Mumford, paleotechnics refers specifically to the age of coal mining and its social and aesthetic consequences preceding the neotechnic
age of electricity characterized by much lower energy transmission costs
and a different scientific setup of society. However, one can say that in
a different way, the paleotechnic persists from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into the twenty-­first. New forms of energy distribution,
synthetic materials with the advancement of chemistry, as well as the
new methods in metallurgy that Mumford sees as a shift from the paleotechnic to the neotechnic gradually since the late nineteenth century and
gradually during twentieth century44 are still, I argue, grounded in the
wider mobilization of the materiality of the earth as part of industriali­
zation, technology, and also media technological culture.
As a perspective of the modern variations of the underworld as a
place of hard work, approach it through Mika Rottenberg’s video piece
Squeeze, featured at the Istanbul Biennial 2013. The video is a singlescreen narrative that unfolds into a spatial underground machine of sorts
in which female workers of different ethnicities participate without direct
relation or knowledge of each other. As a classic depiction of a capitalist
mode of production and alienation, Rottenberg’s video is effective. But it
also engages with the materialities and spatialities in such a way to merit
special attention: the work of lettuce pickers on the field leads through
the lettuce rolls to an underground factory, where different departments,
work practices, and surreal procedures (a tongue sticking out of the wall,
just to be sprayed with water in regular intervals to keep it wet) combine
into a machine articulating heterogeneous elements of an oddly function­
ing assemblage. The machine is itself a processing of materiality just to

Parikka.indd 15

28/01/2015 12:46:15 PM

16  Materiality

produce it as a piece of waste in the end, consisting of blush, rubber,
and lettuce. Here the underground becomes a spatial arrangement to
highlight the separated sphere of production that underlies our feet and
is detached from our direct perception but maintaining the everyday
practices. The underground is the place of repetitious, exploitative, and
even absurd work of arrangements and rearrangements of partial objects
without a view of the big picture. Labor alienation is expressed in terms
of aesthetics of odd parallel realities. It is the sphere of material processing, and both of the earth and the human labor as standing reserve. It is
a gendered zone as well, and Rottenberg’s work is an important guide and
an analogy to what I pursue in A Geology of Media: starting the excavations of contemporary materiality of media arts from beneath your feet,
from the Underworld.
Rottenberg’s video constitutes a recap of something that was expressed in Punch magazine in 1843 in a satirical image “Capital and
Labour,” which shows what orchestrates the modern life: the hidden
underground machinery of workers (Figure 2). It expresses a link between
the imaginary of the underground in the nineteenth century and the more
recent versions of aesthetics of labor and the down under. The visible
reality is sustained by complex and absurd arrangements of work and
infrastructure that is itself an arrangement of human and technological
components. However, the underground of industrialization and capitalism rests as part of the geology of the earth.
The Anthrobscene
The Anthropocene is one of the leading concepts that brought a geological awareness to climate change discussions of the past years and
decades. Suggested by the Nobel Prize–­winning chemist Paul J. Crutzen
more than ten years ago45 and preceded more informally by Eugene Stoermer in the 1980s, the term is a sort of placeholder for the contemporary
moment that stretches from the 1700s or the 1800s to the current time. It
performs this cartography from a geological perspective, which argues
for a sort of a holistic but analytical view to the changes in our life world.
Following the Holocene, the accepted term for the geological period of
the past ten thousand to twelve thousand years, the Anthropocene refers
to the massive changes human practices, technologies, and existence

Parikka.indd 16

28/01/2015 12:46:15 PM

Materiality  17

Figure 2. “Capital and Labour, Cartoon, No. V.” A satirical image from 1843 in Punch
(volume 5) underlines the ontology of labor as one of underground: capitalism works in the
depths to find an infrastructural level that sustains the pleasant consumerized life above
the ground and yet stays invisible. Reprinted with permission of Punch magazine.

have brought across the ecological board. The concept, which is not scientifically universally accepted,46 takes aboard the cross-­species and ecological ties human activity has been developing: the concept speaks to the
relations with other animals—­for instance, domestication of the dog—­and
the various techniques of living, primarily agriculture and fire, which have
had massive influence over thousands of years. But the Anthropocene—­or
the Anthrobscene, to use a provocative combination of the term with the
addition of a qualifying “obscene”47—­starts to crystallize as a systematic
relation to the carboniferous: the layers of photosynthesis that gradually
were being used for heating and then as energy sources for manufacture
in the form of fossil fuels. In China, the use of coal and the emergence of
significant coal mines go back to the Song Dynasty (960–­1279), only later
followed up by key centers such as in England.48 More significantly, the
move from local and regional use of such resources emerges with industri­
alization and the triangulation of fossil fuels as energy source, technology,

Parikka.indd 17

28/01/2015 12:46:15 PM

18  Materiality

and wealth creation related to the new capitalist order. The economic
order was from its start an energetic one, reliant on the slowly accumulated resources of coal, oil, and gas. Fossil fuels such as oil were essential
for the smoother and quicker planetary movement of energy compared to
coal. In this sense, globalization, too, as a form of transported planetarization, has been based on logistics of energy.49 In short, one could claim
that capitalism had its necessary (but not sufficient) conditions in a new
relation with deep times and chemical processes of photosynthesis:
Hitherto humankind had relied on energy captured from ongoing
flows in the form of wind, water, plants, and animals, and from the
100-­or 200-­year stocks held in trees. Fossil fuel use offered access
to carbon stored from millions of years of photosynthesis: a massive energy subsidy from the deep past to modern society, upon
which a great deal of our modern wealth depends.50

The concept of the Anthropocene features technology from the start:
Crutzen starts with James Watt’s steam engine as one key feature of the
Anthropocene, illustrating how it is a concept where geophysics ties in
with cultural techniques. What’s more is the link of escalating proportions that one can follow up with technology and energy as some of the
driving forces of geological proportions. This actually quickly cascades
into realization of the economic and social ties but also toward the interlinks between energy, technology, and chemistry. Indeed, we should not
neglect the list of chemical issues that the notion of the Anthropocene
marches onto the stage, from Crutzen’s first text moving swiftly from Watt
to issues of methane, carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen, nitric oxide,
and more.51 Indeed, the mythological smell of Sulfur of Hell is replaced
by a twentieth-­and twenty-­first-­century version of acid rain, consisting
of sulfur dioxide that results, among other processes (including volcanic
eruptions), from smelting of metal ores and the use of fossil fuel.52
I am fascinated with the possibilities of unfolding media and technol­
ogy through chemistry: an elemental “periodic table” approach to modern scientific materiality. It is clearly one of the issues that any exposition
of the relations of the Anthropocene and (media) technologies should
take into account. This is a theme crystallized by Steffen, Crutzen, and
McNeill:

Parikka.indd 18

28/01/2015 12:46:15 PM

Materiality  19

Fossil fuels and their associated technologies—­steam engines, inter­
nal combustion engines—­made many new activities possible and old
ones more efficient. For example, with abundant energy it proved
possible to synthesize ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen, in effect
to make fertilizer out of air, a process pioneered by the German
chemist Fritz Haber early in the twentieth century. The Haber-­Bosch
synthesis, as it would become known (Carl Bosch was an industrialist)[,] revolutionized agriculture and sharply increased crop yields
all over the world, which, together with vastly improved medical
provisions, made possible the surge in human population growth.53

The metal, chemical, and mineral agents of history become pushed
from mere contextual insights to agents of a different sort of genealogy.
Besides being observable through the scientific eye, and the apparatus of
measurement, which gives verifiability to the analyses in geology, ecology,
and the environmental sciences, such aspects have implications for how
we approach technology in the humanities. In history-­disciplines, the
methodological and thematic expansion of topics has already included
nonhuman issues through environmental concerns, primarily William
McNeill’s work, as well as John McNeill’s.54 Environmental themes become
a way to articulate a global history that offers a complementary narrative
to globalization, as told through the media technological and capitalist
expansion of trade, travel, and communication routes over the past centur­
ies, accelerating the past decades. And it offers a way to account for the
scientific definition of media in the environmental disciplines: this completely different understanding of media of land, air, and water is, however,
a necessary aspect of our more arts and humanities way of understanding
media technologies, as this book demonstrates.
In more theoretical terms, I already mentioned the work of Delanda
as a way of looking at the assemblages of nonhuman kind that work
through Deleuze and Guattari’s geological arguments. More recently,
Dipesh Chakrabarty has influentially argued for a renewed and shared
agenda between natural history and the more human-­centered histories (which we could say include cultural history and media history). In
Chakrabarty’s words, it is crucial that we interrogate the horizon of
the Anthropocene as having effects on our historical sense of being too.

Parikka.indd 19

28/01/2015 12:46:15 PM

20  Materiality

This humanities approach is now also recognizing the importance of biological and geological contributions as part of the social collective. This
includes the realization that humans are also biological and geological
agents55 but also that, to understand the wider patterns of the social, we
need to resist the old-­fashioned methodological dualisms haunting disciplinary thinking of the past. But Chakrabarty’s elegant and important
text includes a further twist that brings such insights into proximity with
postcolonial critiques of globalization as well as analysis of the political
economy of capitalism. In short, we need to be able to find concepts that
help the nonhuman elements contributing to capitalism to become more
visible, grasped, and understood—­as part of surplus creation as well as
the related practices of exploitation. This historical mapping of the environmental is also a mapping of the historical features of capitalism as a
social and technological planetary arrangement.
This critical mapping is a matter of vocabularies we use (the insufficient manner of using the term species to refer to the human impact on
the earth system) and the necessity for a specification of the scientific
concepts too:
At the same time, the story of capital, the contingent history of our
falling into the Anthropocene, cannot be denied by recourse to the
idea of species, for the Anthropocene would not have been possible, even as a theory, without the history of industrialization.56

The stories we tell imply more than just their words; they tell stories of media and mediation, of materiality and the earth. The stories are
themselves of a scale of geological durations that are at first too slow
to comprehend. This demands an understanding of a story that is radically different from the usual meaning of storytelling with which we usually engage in the humanities. This story is more likely to contain fewer
words and more a-­signifying semiotic matter57 that impose a presence
especially in the current era of crisis to which we refer as the climate
change.
Concepts in crisis seek to make sense of change while signposting
the necessity for different vocabularies.58 Hence use of surprising perspectives as well as provocations is needed, as is the work of concepts
that travel across disciplines.59 One implicit concept behind this book is

Parikka.indd 20

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

Materiality  21

Deleuze and Guattari’s pre-­Anthropocene notion of “geology of morals.”
It is part of the set of geophilosophy that the French duo mobilized as
a way to offer nonlinguistic concepts for cultural reality entangled with
other regimes of the material. More accurately, such sets offered ways to
bypass the linguistic accounts of making sense of cultural reality with
different concepts, including the abstract machine and the geologically
tuned ones. Notions of strata, sedimentations, double articulations, and
an alternative to the signifier-­signified-­model are introduced as a way for
a postanthropocentric theory.60 The geological thought that one finds in A
Thousand Plateaus and later in What Is Philosophy? is a way of accounting
for the material production of meanings in relation to their a-­signifying
parts: a sort of assemblage theory of material practices. Deleuze and
Guattari’s philosophy maps the geology of thought, which moves from
the geophilosophical territories in which thinking happens in relation to
the grounds, undergrounds, and territories where the immaterial events
of thinking and affect are always tied to stratified assemblages.61 “Thinking is neither a line drawn between subject and object nor a revolving of
one around the other. Rather, thinking takes place in the relationship of
territory and the earth.”62 Thinking is here stretched as more of a movement of multiplicities that pertains to territories rather than as a cognitive faculty restricted to already formed human subjects. This notion of
geophilosophy attaches thinking to its conditions of existence, which are,
however, always immanent to the event of thought itself.
Such geologically oriented ways of understanding thinking resonate
with the wider thrust of “ecosophy” one finds in Guattari’s writing and
which has been mobilized in the recent media ecology discussions.63 The
notion of geology and (un)grounds has triggered important recent philosophical discussions from Deleuze and Guattari to the nineteenth-­century
thought born in the midst of emerging mining cultures, for instance,
F. W. J. Schelling or the “chemical thought” of Friedrich Schlegel.64 The
early nineteenth century lived in an enthusiasm for the mine, mining, and
the underground—­both poetically across England and Germany and in
political economy of mining.65
In philosophical terms, the geological becomes a way to interrogate in
a material and non-­human-­centered way the constitutive folding of insides
and outsides and the temporal regimes involved in (media) culture.66 What

Parikka.indd 21

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

22  Materiality

is interesting is how, across the various debates, in all their differences,
what is being carved out is, besides a geological-­ontology (geontology?),
also something that can be rolled out as a methodology. For instance, in
Iain Hamilton Grant’s Schelling-­focused writings, it is spelled out in a
manner that relates it to a material stratification of genealogy turning
geology:
Thus the earth is not an object containing its ground within itself, like
the preformationists’ animal series; but rather a series or process of
grounding with respect to its consequents. If geology, or the “mining
process,” opens onto an ungroundedness at the core of any object,
this is precisely because there is no “primal layer of the world,” no
“ultimate substrate” or substance on which everything ultimately
rests. The lines of serial dependency, stratum upon stratum, that
geology uncovers do not rest on anything at all, but are the records
of actions antecedent in the production of consequents.67

The seemingly stable groundedness of the earth reveals through the
modern practices of mining (and one should not neglect their relation to
the hypercapitalist exploitation of the earth itself on a massive technological level) another sort of an ontology that resonates with the logic of
capitalism as articulated by Deleuze and Guattari: the shifting ungrounds
that they call the axiomatics of capitalism, which work through a constant deterritorialization of established territories, like a massive geoengineering project burrowing through formed lands, territorializing them
in novel ways. No wonder that the geological itself turns out to be more
defined by its holes, mines, and the lack of one final determining stratum;
instead, what one finds are the various “records of actions,” which, in the
case of this book, are translated as the epistemological and technological
workings on/with the geophysical.68
The metallurgical is another geocentric concept Deleuze and Guattari
mobilized as a form of “minor science” of new materialism that teases out
the potentialities in matter. It is offered as a counterexample to the hylomorphic models where matter is expected to be inert and the form animat­
ing it immaterial. Instead, notions of vital materialism (Bennett), metallic
affects (Delanda), and in general new materialism all assume a dif­ferent
sort of material assemblage.69 The metallurgical refers to an ambu­lant,

Parikka.indd 22

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

Materiality  23

nomad science that contrasts with the form-­seeking Royal Science that
extracts constants and categories from its observations. The metallurgist
is a figure of someone who “follows the flow of matter”70 and invests in
giving a reality to the variations and potentials in the object. Metal is the
privileged example and is inspiring to such vital materialists as Bennett
because of its seemingly stable solidity, which, however, is in metallurgist
perspective and practice revealed as teeming with material potentials
that can be teased out in different constellations, temperatures, and conditions; this applies to the atomic level, where a metallurgist has a prac­
tical “know-­how” relation to metal that applies to the wider role metals
play in cultural assemblages as nonhuman agents.71 Hence, to follow Ben­
nett’s adaptation of Deleuze and Guattari’s ethological idea about bodies
defined by their unfolding potential, where “ethology” refers to experimental relationality, “the desire of the craftsperson to see what a metal
can do, rather than the desire of the scientist to know what a metal is,
enabled the former to discern a life in metal and thus, eventually, to collaborate more productively with it.”72
This stance should not be confused with a practice–­theory division.
Indeed, I want to insist that there is a metallurgical way of conducting
theoretical work: ambulant flows, transversal connections, and teasing
out the materiality of matter in new places, in new assemblages of cultural life in contemporary technological media.
The cartography of geocentric cultural theory is definitely not only
about philosophical references. From the James Hutton of The Theory
of the Earth to philosophy (Hegel, Schelling, and contemporary speculative realist discussions involving Grant, Graham Harman, and Steven
Shaviro), we can also move toward the media geological contexts, which
this book tackles. Despite references to the ongoing debates in theory,
this book does not attempt to create a primarily philosophical argument;
more accurately, it argues the case for a geology of media that tries to pin
down the often rather broad notion of “nonhuman” agency to some case
studies concerning the assemblages in which the grounds of media are
ungrounded through the actual geologies of mining, materiality, and the
ecosophic quest becoming also geosophic.
Indeed, the earth of media finds itself displaced from geography to
geophysics. This is why Pynchon’s latest book, The Bleeding Edge (2013),

Parikka.indd 23

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

24  Materiality

refers to the future media landscapes of permafrost: the natural cooling
systems of northern climates (or by rivers in abandoned paper mill factories acting as remnants of the industrial era serving as corporate housing
for the server farms) are perfect for the servers and data storage that release heat. Data processing needs energy, which releases heat, of course.
Data demand their ecology, one that is not merely a metaphorical technoecology but demonstrates dependence on the climate, the ground, and
the energies circulating in the environment. Data feeds of the environment both through geology and the energy-­demand. What’s more, it is
housed in carefully managed ecologies. It’s like the natural elements of
air, water, fire (and cooling), and earth are mobilized as part of the environmental aspects of data. Data mining is not only about the metaphorical big data repositories of social media.
In a great summarizing phrase in Andrew Blum’s book Tubes, a Facebook data center manager speaks to this elemental part of data: “This
has nothing to do with clouds. It has everything to do with being cold.”73
The manager summons the same world as a character in Pynchon’s novel.
Cool, cold data are not just a linguistic or visual metaphor, despite that
elegant modernism that still lives inside the architectures of data—­at
least in the images Google released of its data server factories. Coolness
is not a media theoretical attitude in this context but a media management issue that ties the earth to the escape velocity of data.
Data need air. “Cool outside air is let into the building through
adjustable louvers near the roof; deionized water is sprayed into it; and
fans push the conditioned air down onto the data center floor,”74 explains
Blum. Coolness of cyberpunk transforms from a rhetorical trope to the
coolness of the building’s climate control. Fans surround the terabytes of
data. The manager of the data center continues about the building: “The
air hits this concrete floor and roils left and right. This whole building
is like the Mississippi River. There’s a huge amount of air coming in, but
moving really slowly.”75 It’s important to notice the persistence of issues
of ecology from air to the soil as well as noncognitive work: that we still
talk of factories and rather physical processes having to do with our hardware and how we manage and work with data at their material level. Blum:
“The cloud is a building. It works like a factory. Bits come in, they get
massaged and put together in the right way and sent out.”76

Parikka.indd 24

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

Materiality  25

Such journalistic narratives as Blum’s are useful in highlighting the
alternative rhetoric to the cyberpunk immateriality, which has persisted
since the 1980s up until the present day. Now a geopolitical turn is happening that takes into account that data have a material and legal territory and that we can speak of geophysics of information. This is another
sort of a context that justifies the use of the hybrid expression “geology
of media.” This differs from the literary genre of steampunk that follows
a cyberpunk aesthetics of the 1980s and 1990s and offers a literal steampunk for the twenty-­first century: the steam of the data center somewhere up north, preferably on the permafrost, cooling down the heat of
data crunching. The Anthrobscene logic: the North affords the Cool, the
South provides the Cheap (labor).
The Chapters
The chapters of this book are strata themselves. They stratify and condense themes that intertwine and build on each other as dynamic apparatuses mobilizing different sorts of material: historical sources, theory,
and, importantly, references to contemporary media art projects and
practices.
One could call this approach a media history of matter: the different components, minerals, metals, chemicals, and other things involved
in media are considered as essential to media history and archaeology.
Media technologies can be understood as a long story of experimenting
with different materials—­from glass plates to chemicals, from selenium
to silicon, from coltan to rare earth minerals, from dilute sulfuric acid to
shellac silk, different crystals in telegraphic receivers, and gutta-­percha
for insulation in earlier transatlantic wired communication. Also Mumford notes this in his analysis of the emergence of modern materiality of
technology: technological phases, or “epistemes” as Foucault might have
it, are themselves functions of the ways in which materials and energy are
channeled, appropriated, and exploited:
Just as one associates the wind and water power of the eotechnic economy with the use of wood and glass, and the coal of the
paleotechnic period with iron, so does electricity bring into wide
industrial use its own specific materials: in particular, the new alloys,

Parikka.indd 25

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

26  Materiality
the rare earths, and the lighter materials. At the same time, it creates a new series of synthetic compounds that supplement paper,
glass and wood: celluloid, vulcanite, Bakelite and the synthetic resins, with special properties of unbreakability, electrical resistance,
imperviousness to acids, or elasticity.77

What for Mumford marks the passage from paleotechnics to neotechnics is for my purposes in A Geology of Media altogether a passage
of different ways of mobilizing the earth into and as media. The march of
aluminum came with its own material affordances of lightness, feeding
into new forms of speed and transport. And rare earth minerals are not
a discovery only of the digital media age: tantalum, tungsten, thorium,
cerium, iridium, manganese, and chromium are among the mate­rials
that Mumford sees as essential to understanding the twentieth-­century
technological culture.78 We can add that it is this list that also works as
true “transmedia”: useful elements from gadgets and systems of electricity to mechanical technology to digital media, essential in different ways.
Besides the materials of production, media history is a story of
relations between the organic and nonorganic and the waste products
emerg­ing from the use and misuse of materials. Media history participates in stories of global expansion through colonialism and the rush for
resources: the invaluable materials from minerals to oil and other energy
sources such as uranium—­a global mapping of territories increasingly
exhausted.79 Besides historical examples, we are living a new geopolitical
rush now: military, corporate, and scientific operations hand in hand
in the Arctic regions, dangerous areas of Africa, Afghanistan, and, for
instance, the deep seas, looking for deeper hidden resources of petroleum
and critical materials from metals to uranium.80 Besides materials and
waste, media deal and function through energy. The transistor-­based
information technology culture would not be thinkable without the various meticulous insights into the material characteristics and differences
between germanium and silicon, not only in their “pure” state but mixed
with just the right dose of impurities. Currently in the long networks of
media operations—­and media in operation—­energy is an essential part of
the circuit where the geopolitical race for resources meets the geophysical
needs of advanced technologies.81 This means shifting our focus with the

Parikka.indd 26

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

Materiality  27

help of media arts and design projects to the other stuff of media materialism: the metals, minerals, and chemicals in which we can develop the
aforementioned ecosophical and geosophical perspective.
This book aims to take up these issues in five main chapters. This
chapter acted as a theoretical introduction to the context and the issues.
In the next chapter, I focus on deep times. The concept has already been
effectively used by Siegfried Zielinski in his take on the paleontology and
geology of media arts, but my point is to remind of the need for an alter­
native deep time. In this account, we take deep times more literally and
look at geology of media in and through the mines and (un)grounds.
The third chapter follows suit and continues developing specific aesthetic concepts for the geophysical media world. It picks up on the idea
of psychogeophysics—­a version of the Situationist psychogeography—­
and offers a radical aesthetics of the media technological world that maps
the relations between subjectivity, capitalism, and the earth in long-­term
durations and geophysical assemblages. In the chapter, we focus on projects by the Berlin and London–­placed microresearchlab, Martin Howse’s
earthcomputing, and the Crystal World project by Kemp, Jordan, and
Howse: speculative media arts that addresses in assays and technological
assemblages the substrate as part of our media systems.
Running through the book is the aim to talk about the variety of
materialisms and temporalities of media. In the fourth chapter, I address
these themes through a nonhuman particle: dust. Dust is carried forward
as a rhetorical device too, mobilizing the entangled materialities of global
labor and residue materialism. Dust is found as residue of polished iPads
as well as attached to workers’ lungs from coal mines to contemporary fac­
tories of information technology. The art projects by Yokokoji–­Harwood
(YoHa; from the United Kingdom) are good examples of addressing this
notion of residue, from coal to aluminum. They reveal an alternative side
to the discourse of cognitive capitalism: the world of hardwork and hardware that persists as a defining factor of digital media culture.
Chapter 5 picks up on (media) fossils. The paleontological insight
to the history of the planet might put special interest on fossils, but similarly it is a figure that one finds resurfacing in Walter Benjamin’s analysis of advanced capitalism as well as in contemporary projects such as
Grégory Chatonsky’s art and Trevor Paglen’s extension of the geophysical

Parikka.indd 27

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

28  Materiality

sphere of technological fossils to the dead media orbit of satellites circulating the earth. Issues of deep space become part of the geological agenda
and expanded into thoughts about the temporality of the Anthropocene.
In addition to the main chapters, and after the meditations offered
in the afterword, we decided to add an appendix because of its centrality
to all the issues addressed in the book. “Zombie Media: Circuit Bending Media Archaeology into an Art Method” is a text cowritten with the
artist–­theorist Garnet Hertz. It stems from our shared theoretical interests in media archaeology and electronic waste as well as circuit bending
and hardware hacking as practice-­based design interventions into contemporary technological culture.
Throughout the book, I use art projects not merely as ways to illustrate the main thesis but also for the converse: many of the things and
arguments in this book have been first mapped by artistic methods. I
refer to projects such as iMine (by Baruch Gottlieb, Horacio González
Diéguez, and Cocomoya); the microresearchlab group; Trevor Paglen’s
visual art, Katie Paterson; YoHa’s work on aluminum and coal; various
hardware-­hacking and circuit-­bending practitioners, including Garnet
Hertz but also, for instance, Benjamin Gaulon’s Recyclism; Grégory Chatonsky’s art installations, Jonathan Kemp’s and Ryan Jordan’s work, Jamie
Allen’s, and David Gauthier’s geosurveys of media infrastructures; and
many more. It was initially through many of these projects that I gained
insight into and inspiration for many particular aspects of the book. The
artistic projects were able to demonstrate the issues of this new materialism of geophysical kind: a different sort of materiality and an alternative
digital media arts culture, irreducible to the enthusiasm for software.

Parikka.indd 28

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

2
AN ALTERNATIVE DEEP
TIME OF THE MEDIA
They penetrated to the bowels of earth and dug up wealth, bad
cause of all our ills.
—­OVID, METAMORPHOSES

The Submerged Cloud
The debates about the Anthropocene and electronic waste underline a
necessity to engage with the geophysical stakes of media cultural infrastructure. Much of recent years’ focus has been on the cloud and its
promise of disappearance of hardware and the immaterial embeddedness in data. However, the cloud brings with it a demand to develop new
political vocabularies that address the double bind of technical materiality and conceptual immateriality, as Seb Franklin argues.1 The issue of the
cloud extends to software cultures and their disappearance into a branch
of the service industries;2 it brandishes the importance of the hardware
in new ways but seems to be limited to being the vessel of the service in
attractive mobile forms, such as the investment in different sorts of tablets and smartphones evinces; it attracts the circulation of discourses of
movement and immateriality, of the imaginary and dreams that fulfill the
necessary gaps in the actual user experience when encountering a lack of
wireless signal or some other physical disturbance. It was in a very different way that the geopolitical aspects of the physical Internet were highlighted in 2013. In the wake of revelations of NSA’s spy program PRISM,
the world saw images of lonely data server farms and other institutions of
29

Parikka.indd 29

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

30  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

the geopolitical surveillance agencies—­the mute monolith structures, also
pictured recently in Time magazine (December 23, 2013) by Trevor Paglen.
But after Edward Snowden’s whistle-­blowing, what also surfaced was
the case of seemingly random places such as Brazil: why was Brazil so
much on the map of the surveillance operations of the American agency?
What was so interesting about Brazil? The reason was quickly exposed: it
was about the submarine cables. The paranoid surveillance mechanisms of
the post-­9/11 world of U.S. terror are also highlighting the extensive infrastructural arrangements of networks on the physical level. One of the main
lines, Atlantis-­2, connects South America to Europe and Africa,3 allowing
for a crucial interruption node to exist when data arrive ashore, to put it
poetically. We need to look at the underground as well as at submerged
realities, which are not that much different from the laying of the Atlantic
cables in the mid-­nineteenth century. Back then, the submerged media
were escorted by an enthusiasm of interconnectedness. Now it is a secret
enthusiasm for interruptedness. The grounds, ungrounds, and undergrounds of media infrastructures condition what is visible and what is
invisible. Under the ground, one finds the subterranean infrastructures of
modernity: telecommunications cables as much as sewage systems, metro
trains, and electricity. For instance, the Parisian underground galler­ies became even a tourist attraction.4 Nineteenth-­century urbanization meant a
move underground, whereas we seem to live a twenty-­first-­century move
to the heavens. Yet clouds reach back to the land and sea territories and the
geopolitical.5 The earth is part of media both as a resource and as transmission. The earth conducts, also literally, forming a special part of the
media and sound artistic circuitry.6 It is the contested political earth that
extends to being part of military “infrastructure”: the earth hides political
stakes and can be formed as part of military strategy and maneuvers.
The underground is addressed in this chapter through an investi­
gation of deep time. Besides a geological concept, it has been adopted
in media arts discussions by the German media (an)archaeologist and
variantologist Siegfried Zielinski. However, in the context of the materiality of media, we need to ask, do we need more strongly to underline the
geophysical aspects of this geology of media and deep time? Do we need
to go underground, submerge, and dig out cables submarine and subterranean to understand further hidden depths of materiality of media?

Parikka.indd 30

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  31

And the Earth Screamed, Alive
What if your guide to the world of media would not be the usual suspect—­an entrepreneur or evangelista from Silicon Valley or a management school scholar aspiring to catch up with the smooth crowd-­sourced
clouding of the network sphere? What if your guide would be Professor
Challenger, the Arthur Conan Doyle character from the 1928 short story
“When the World Screamed”? The story appeared in Liberty magazine
and offered an odd insight into a mad scientist’s world, with a hint of
what we would nowadays call “speculative realism.” Professor Challenger, whose dubious and slightly mad reputation preceded him, offered an
insight into what later philosophers such as the French writing duo Gilles
Deleuze and Félix Guattari happily picked up on: that the earth is alive
and its crust is tingling with life. But the idea of the living earth has a long
cultural history too: from antiquity, it persists as the idea of terra mater
and, in the emerging mining cultures of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, becomes embedded as part of romantic philosophy; later, in
the twentieth century, the emergence of Gaia theories brings a different
connotation to the holistic life of the planet.
The narrative of geology and strata starts with a letter: an undated
letter addressed to Mr. Peerless Jones, an expert in artesian drilling. The
letter is a request for assistance. The nature of what is required is not
specified, but the reputation of the mad scientist, the slightly volatile personality of Professor Challenger, promises that it would not be a normal
operation. Escorted with suspicion and curiosity, it soon becomes evident
that Mr. Jones’s drilling expertise is needed. In Sussex, United Kingdom,
at Hengist Down, Professor Challenger is engaged in a rather secret drilling operation, although it remains for a longer period unclear for what
sort of a job the special drills are needed. Even the sort of material to be
penetrated reveals only later to be different from what is usually expected
when we speak of mining operations: not so much chalk or clay or the
usual geological strata but more of a jellylike substance.
The professor had for a longer time drilled deeper and deeper
through the earth’s crust until he had finally ended up so deep so as to
find a layer that pulsates like a living animal. He needed help and contacted Jones for the project that gradually had shifted from geology to

Parikka.indd 31

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

32  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

something else. The earth is alive, and that this vitality can be proved with
experimental means was actually the true objective of Challenger’s mission. Instead of drilling and mining for petroleum, coal, copper, iron ore,
and other valuables for which men usually dig holes in the ground, Challenger’s mission is driven by a desire to prove a new speculative position
that concerns the living depths of the earth: beyond the strata of “sallow
lower chalk, the coffee-­coloured Hastings beds, the lighter Ashburnham
beds, the dark carboniferous clays, and . . . gleaning in the electric light,
band after band of jet-­black, sparkling coal alternative with the rings of
clay,”7 one finds the layers, which did not adhere to the classical geological theories of Hutton or Lyell. It seemed suddenly as if undeniable that
even nonorganic matter is alive: “The throbs were not direct, but gave the
impression of a gentle ripple or rhythm, which ran across the surface,”8
Mr. Jones describes the deep surface they found. “The surface was not
entirely homogenous but beneath it, seen as through ground glass, there
were dim whitish patches or vacuoles, which varied constantly in shape
and size.”9 The whole layers, the core and the strata, throbbed, pulsated,
and animated. It should not even be necessary to go to similar lengths
as Professor Challenger does, in one of the most bizarre rapelike scenes
in literature, when he penetrates that jellyesque layer just to make the
earth scream. This scientific sadism echoes in the ears of the audience
and much further. It is the sound of “a thousand of sirens in one, paralyzing all the great multitude with its fierce insistence, and floating away
through the still summer air until it went echoing along the whole South
Coast and even reach our French neighbors across the Channel.”10 All
this was observed and witnessed by an audience called by the professor—­
peers and interested international crowd, by invitation only.
The interest for “the bowels of the earth”11 was not restricted to
the writing of fiction and the vibrant language of Conan Doyle returning merely to the scientific discourse of geophysics. Professor Challenger
was predated by nineteenth-­century fiction characters, like Heinrich in
Novalis’s Heinrich von Ofterdingen (1800/1802) asking, “Is it possible
that beneath our feet a world of its own is stirring in a great life?”12 The
poetic thrust toward the living, pulsating earth opened it up: for coal, for
minerals, for precious material. Jules Verne’s Les Indes Noires (1887; The
Black Indies) told the story of an exhausted coal mine where, however, a

Parikka.indd 32

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  33

new discovery is made, leading into a whole underground Coal Town.13
Theories of the Hollow Earth might not have persisted except in popular
fiction, but the idea of the underground artificial infinity—­now as a seem­
ingly infinite resource too—­gained ground.14
The earth had become a resource. Metals and minerals were tightly
linked to the emergence of modern engineering, science, and technical
media. For instance, copper has been a crucial material feature of technical media culture since the nineteenth century. A lot of the early copper
mines were, however, exhausted by the start of the twentieth century, lead­
ing into new demands both in terms of international reach and depth: new
drills were needed for deeper mining, which was necessary to provide the
materials for an increasing international need and systematic—­and yet
environmentally wasteful—­use in wires and network culture. In addition,
the increasing demand and international reach resulted in the cartelization

Figure 3. The underground became both a poetic and an engineered realm of technology,
from romanticism to twentieth-­century industrialization. The mines never disappeared
but persist as effective geological scars even in advanced technological culture. Bingham
Canyon copper mine in Utah, Rio Tinto, Kennecott Utah Copper Corp. Photograph by
Spencer Musik.

Parikka.indd 33

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

34  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

of the copper business from mining to smelting.15 Indeed, besides such
contemporary contexts of mining where Challenger’s madness starts to
make sense, one is tempted to think of an imaginary of horrors of the
underground from Lovecraft to Fritz Leiber. Leiber preempts a much
more recent writer of the biopolitics of petroleum, Reza Negarestani,
both highlighting the same theme: petroleum is a living subterranean
life-­form.16 One should neither ignore the earth screams caused by
hydraulic fracturing—­fracking that, besides the promise that it might
change the geopolitical balance of energy production, also points toward
what is often neglected in the discourse of geopolitics, that is, geos, the
earth, the soil, and the crust. By pumping pressurized water and chemicals
underground, the procedure forces gas out from between rocks, forcing
the earth to become an extended resource. Rocks fracture, benzene and
formaldehyde creep in, and the planet is primed to such a condition to
expose itself. Fracking is, in the words of Brett Neilson, perfectly tuned to
the capitalist hyperbole of expansion beyond limits: “Whether it derives
from the natural commons of earth, fire, air, and water or the networked
commons of human cooperation, fracking creates an excess that can be
tapped.”17
Perhaps Professor Challenger’s current versions are not found only in
fiction either. Besides mining operations, such scientific missions as the
Kola superdeep borehole in the ex–­Soviet Union was such a hyperbolically
sounding attempt that stayed true to the Challenger spirit. It held the
depth record for a long while, at 12,262 meters. Scientists found in the
early 1980s, after years of patiently, slowly drilling through the crust, an
odd reality of geophysical phenomena, chemical surprises such as boil­ing
hydrogen gas, and the sheer existence of water much deeper than expected
in the rock minerals.18
Inside the earth one finds an odd chemical, rocky, and metallic reality, which feeds into metal metaphysics and digital devices. Besides the
speculative stance, one can revert back to empirical material too. In short,
of direct relevance to our current media technological situation is the reminder that according to year 2008 statistics, media materiality is very
metallic: “36 percent of all tin, 25 percent of cobalt, 15 percent of palladium, 15 percent silver, 9 percent of gold, 2 percent of copper, and 1 percent of aluminum”19 go annually to media technologies. We have shifted

Parikka.indd 34

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  35

from being a society that until the mid-­twentieth century was based on
a very restricted list of materials (“wood, brick, iron, copper, gold, silver,
and a few plastics”20) to the fact that even a computer chip is composed
of “60 different elements.”21 Such lists of metals and materials of technology include critical materials, including rare earth minerals that are increasingly at the center of both global political controversies of tariffs and
export restrictions from China. They are also related to the debates concerning the environmental damage caused by extensive open-­pit mining
massively reliant on chemical processes. Indeed, if the actual rock mined
is likely to contain less than 1 percent of copper,22 it means that the pressure is on the chemical processes of teasing out the Cu for further refined
use in our technological devices.
The figures about metals of media seem astounding but testify to
another materiality of technology that links with Conan Doyle but also
with contemporary media arts discourse of the deep time of the earth.
However, I will move on from Professor Challenger to Siegfried Zielinski,
the German media studies professor, and his conceptualization of deep
times of media art histories. In short, and what I shall elaborate in more
detail soon, the figure of the deep time is for Zielinski a sort of a media
archaeological gesture that, though borrowing from paleontology, actually
turns out to be a riff to understanding the longer-­term durations of art and
science collaboration in Western and non-­Western contexts. However,
I want to argue that there is a need for a more literal understanding and
mobilization of deep times—­in terms of both depth and temporality—­
in media technological discourse and in relation to media art histories
too. Professor Challenger is here to provide the necessary, even if slightly
dubious, point about geological matter as living: this sort of a media history is of a speculative kind in terms of referring to a completely different
time scale than usually engaged with in terms of our field. It borrows
from the idea of dynamics of nonlinear history that Manuel Delanda so
inspirationally mapped in terms of genes, language, and geology but which,
in this case, can be approached even more provocatively as not just thousands but millions and billions of years of nonlinear stratified media history.23 Media history conflates with earth history; the geological materials
of metals and chemicals gets deterritorialized from their strata and reterritorialized in machines that define our technical media culture.

Parikka.indd 35

28/01/2015 12:46:16 PM

36  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

The extension of life to nonorganic processes follows from Deleuze
and Guattari’s philosophy. Life consists of dynamic patterns of variation
and stratification. Stratification is a living double articulation that shows
how geology is much more dynamic than just dead matter. This is obviously an allusion to the reading one finds in Deleuze and Guattari’s A
Thousand Plateaus, in which the whole philosophical stakes of this enter­
prise are revealed. The intensities of the earth, the flows of its dynamic
unstable matter, are locked into strata. This process of locking and capture is called stratification, organizing the molecular nonorganic life into
“molar aggregates.”24
Hence, as a minor rhetorical question detouring via Deleuze and
Guattari, what if we start our excavation of media technologies and digital
culture not from Deleuze’s so-­well and often quoted “Postscript on the
Societies of Control” text but from their joint texts on geology and stratifi­
cation?25 This is the implicit task of this chapter, with a focus on the emerging critical discourse of resource depletion, minerals, and the even harder
materiality than just hardware. Hardware perspectives are not necessarily
hard enough, and if we want to extend our material notions of media thor­
oughly toward deeper materialities and deeper times, we need to be able
to talk of the nonmediatic matter that contributes to the assemblages and
durations of media as technology. This comes out most clearly in two
ways. First is the research and design, fabrication and standardization, of
new materials that allow for mediatic and high-­technology processes to
emerge. This relates to history of chemistry as well as product development, aluminum and other synthetic materials that characterize modernity, alongside the work on material sciences that enabled so much of
computer culture. Silicon and germanium are obvious examples of discoveries in chemistry that proved to be essential for computer culture.
More recently, to take an illustrative example, the minuscule twenty-­two-­
nanometer transistors that function without silicon are made of indium,
gallium, and arsenid and demonstrate that a lot of science happens way
before discursive wizardry of creative technology discourse. The MIT
research project is allowing “evaporated indium, gallium, and arsenic
atoms to react, forming a very thin crystal of InGaAs that will become
the transistor’s channel,”26 a short quotation that suffices to narrativize

Parikka.indd 36

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  37

that material­ity of media starts much before media become media. Second, in a parallel fashion, we need to be able to discuss the media that
are not anymore media. This is the other pole of media materiality that is
less high tech and more defined by obsolescence:27 the mined rare earth
minerals essential to computers and in general advanced technology
industries from entertainment to the military, as well as, for instance, the
residue products from the processes of fabrication, like the minuscule
aluminum dust residue released from polishing iPad cases to be desirably
shiny for the consumer market28 (see chapter 4).
An Ecology of Deep Time
Zielinski’s notion of Tiefenzeit, deep time, is itself an attempt to pick up
on the idea of geological times to guide the way in which we think of the
humanities-focused topics of media arts and digital culture. Deep time
carries a lot of conceptual gravity and is employed as a way to investigate
the “Deep Time of Technical Means of Hearing and Seeing.” Zielinski’s
approach kicks off as a critique of a teleological notion of media evolution that assumes a natural progress embedded in the narratives of the
devices—­a sort of a parasitical attachment, or insistence on the rationality of the machines and digital culture, that of course has had its fair share
of critique in the past decades of media and cultural studies. We could call
this “mythopoesis”29 (to borrow a notion from a different context of the
Ippolita group), which as a critical perspective, focuses on the nar­ratives
of and on technology as the site of political struggle. Zielinski’s media
archaeological and more so anarchaeological approach, however, hones
in on geological time.
For Zielinski, earth times and geological durations become a theoretical strategy of resistance against the linear progress myths that impose
a limited context for understanding technological change. They relate in
parallel to the early modern discussions concerning the religious temporal order vis-­à-­vis the growing “evidence of immense qualitative geological changes”30 that articulated the rift between some thousands of years
of biblical time and the millions of years of earth history.
This deep temporality combined the spatial and temporal. Indeed, in
James Hutton’s Theory of the Earth from 1778, depth means time: under

Parikka.indd 37

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

38  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

the layers of granite, you find further strata of slate signaling the existence of deep temporalities. Hutton is proposing a radical immensity of
time, although it comes without a promise of change; all is predetermined as part of a bigger cycle of erosion and growth.31 Despite his use of
terms such as continual succession for time of the earth and its geological
cycles discovered in its strata (the reading of strata, “stratigraphy”), time
of immense durations does not, however, change in the historical fashion. More specifically, and in Hutton’s words,
the immense time necessarily required for this total destruction of
the land, must not be opposed to that view of future events, which
is indicated by the surest facts, and most approved principles. Time,
which measures every thing in our idea, and is often deficient to our
schemes, is to nature endless and as nothing; it cannot limit that by
which alone it had existence; and, as the natural course of time,
which to us seems infinite, cannot be bounded by any operation
that may have an end, the progress of things upon this globe, that
is, the course of nature, cannot be limited by time, which must proceed in a continual succession.32

Hutton continues to discuss and consider “the globe of this earth as
a machine, constructed upon chemical as well as mechanical principles,”
as well as an organized body that proceeds through times of decay and
repair. Hutton proposes a view and a theory of the earth as one of cycles
and variations:
His theory posited that the earth was constantly restoring itself.
He based this concept on a fundamental cycle: erosion of the present land, followed by the deposition of eroded grains (or dead
ocean organisms) on the sea floor, followed by the consolidation of
those loose particles into sedimentary rock, followed by the raising
of those rocks to form new land, followed by erosion of the new
land, followed by a complete repeat of the cycle, over and over
again. Hutton was also the first to recognize the profound importance of subterranean heat, the phenomenon that causes volcanoes, and he argued that it was the key to the uplifting of formerly
submerged land.33

Parikka.indd 38

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  39

As becomes clear later, in Lyell’s classic account of geology, this articulates a division in terms of the geological versus the historical.34 For
Lyell, Hutton’s assumption of the cyclical deep times becomes a research
tool to understand the radical temporality of the earth. Lyell was definitely interested in change in ways that did not pertain to Hutton,35 but
this historicity was still of a different order to that of the emerging history
disciplines focused on the hermeneutic worlds of the human. The different sets of knowledge formations pertaining to the natural and to the
moral are also the context for two different modes of temporal order. The
time of the human concerns differs from the geological, which, however,
is argued to be a radical dynamic force that affects life across the boundaries of the organic and the nonorganic. And yet it was a necessity to
keep these separated, despite that modern institutions were increasingly
interested in such durations that surpassed the human: geological and
biological (in sciences of the evolution). In creative cultural theory, we
have recently seen inspiring accounts that connect feminist ontology with

Figure 4. A lithograph featuring a visualization of geology through the ages of the earth
and details of types of stone. Colored lithograph by Bethmont, 1911, after himself.
Wellcome Library, London.

Parikka.indd 39

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

40  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

Charles Darwin’s temporal ontology of open-­ended becoming through
evolution.36
Influential thinkers such as Rosi Braidotti have built on the Anthropocene discussions to connect it to a wider geocentric perspective, which
prompts us to rethink fundamental notions of subjectivity, community,
and political attachment. For Braidotti, the notion is, however, to be connected to ongoing struggles on the level of postcolonial and feminist
agendas as well as avoiding technophobia and holistic, nostalgic fantasies
of the earth. One could claim that some of the radicalization of the temporal ontology started with Hutton and Lyell already37—­a time beyond
biblical restrictions but tied to a view of a grand cycle that with Lyell led
to the master trope of uniformitarianism.38
But neither Hutton’s nor Lyell’s theory is a stable ground for a more
radical and nonlinear account of time for contemporary cultural and media
theory. Indeed, it might have displaced biblical time but introduced the
earth in an odd way almost as if a transcendent entity outside historical
change. Hutton’s worldview was deistic, and for him the world was a
perfectly designed machine.39 Hutton’s geological world is also without
change and difference and works in cyclical temporeality.40 It is no wonder,
then, as Simon Schaffer points out, that Hutton’s account inspired Adam
Smith’s ideas concerning the invisible hand of capitalism in the emerging
industrial system.41 Both seemed to believe in universal laws governing
the empirical world. The embedded cyclicality, of course, offers a fruitful
view to erosions and renewals. For Zielinski, geological metaphors offer
a way to investigate technological culture, but for Hutton, the planet is
a machine. It is, however, one modeled according to the steam engines
of his age, primarily the Newcomen engine, which, in its principles of
expansion of steam, also gives the idea of elevation of the crust directly to
inspire Hutton.42 This machine is also one of organic unity and cyclical
renewal, which feeds off the heat at its core.43
Such ideas inspired various visualizations of the deep time of the
earth that machinates through the life-­enabling media of the soil. The
deeper strata and their remaining layers, including fossils, signal time as
well: the planet is structured according to a depth of the temporal past.
These layers structure animal and human life but also the industrial system of production and the technological culture of human civilization.

Parikka.indd 40

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  41

But this is exactly where Zielinski also departs. Paradoxically, the inspiration of Hutton (and one should remember that he was only one of the
geotheorists working on this topic in his time) goes both toward the universalizing and standardizing logic of the industrial factory system and
toward Zielinski’s exactly opposite account of variantology that, however,
finds a different tune with Stephen Jay Gould. Indeed, through Gould,
Zielinski is able to carve out a more detailed account of what the geological idea affords to media art history and media analysis as variantology.
To achieve this, Zielinski has to turn from Hutton to more contempo­
rary readings of geology and paleontology. Zielinski picks up on Gould’s
paleontological explanations and ideas that emphasize the notion of
variation. It is in Gould’s Time’s Arrow, Time’s Cycle that Zielinski finds a
suitable account for a critique of progress in media culture. As a reader of
Gould, Zielinski notes that the quantifying notion of deep time is itself
renewed with a qualitative characteristic that produces a critique of myths
of progress, which present a linear imagination of the world. Both discover
the necessity to abandon divinity from the cosmological picture, whether
one of the earth or the media. Instead, one has to develop such images,
metaphors, and iconography that do not reproduce illusions of linear
progress “from lower to higher, from simple to complex.”44 A resurging
emphasis on diversity takes the place of the too neatly stacked historical
layers.
Without going too much into the geologic debates, we need to under­
stand how Gould’s note itself is based on his arguments against uniformitarianism. Gould’s argument for the “punctuated equilibrium” is targeted
against the false assumption of continuity of a uniform evolution that
persisted in the various geological and evolutionary accounts for a long
time. It includes Lyell’s views as much as Darwin’s beliefs.45 The series
of arguments and academic discussion Gould started together with his
cowriter Niles Eldredge stems from the early 1970s and included, besides
a new way of approaching the fossil record, also a different sort of an
understanding of the temporal ontology of geology.46 In short, against
the view that one can read a slow evolutionary change from the geological records, which at times are with gaps and missing parts, one has to
approach this “archive” in a different way. This imaginary starts already
in the nineteenth century: processes of transmission and recording are

Parikka.indd 41

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

42  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

already present in the earth itself, a vast library waiting to be deciphered.47
However, the idea of punctuated equilibrium suggested that instead of
the constant uniform speed of change and evolution, the fossil record
might show different speeds of changes: from slow to sudden jolts. The
processes of speciation and variation are not necessarily one speed only
but more of a multitemporal mix with singular points that punctuate the
evolution in specific ways.
Already this short elaboration reveals the wider scientific stakes in
Gould and Eldredge’s account that was to offer a different theoretical
understanding of time in geology. For Zielinski, this enabled a way to
understand media archaeology as related to a notion of deep times of the
ways in which we modify, manipulate, create, and re-­create means of hear­
ing and seeing. Zielinski introduces inspirational deep times of apparatuses, ideas, and solutions for mediatic desires that take inventors as the
gravity point. He himself admits this approach as being even romantic
and focused paradoxically on human heroes. It includes figures such as
Empedocles (of four elements fame), Athanasius Kircher, and, for instance,
the operatic dreams of Joseph Chudy and his early audiovisual telegraph
system from the late eighteenth century (he composed a one-­act opera
on the topic, The Telegraph or the Tele-­Typewriter). It also includes the
opium-­fueled media desires of Jan Evangelista Purkyne, a Czech from
the early nineteenth century in the habit of using his own body for various drug-­and electricity-­based experiments to see how the body itself
is a creative medium. What we encounter are variations that define an
alternative deep time strata of our media culture outside the mainstream.
It offers the anarchaeology of surprises and differences, of the uneven in
the media cultural past revealing a different aspect of a possible future.
Zielinski’s project is parallel to imaginations of “archaeologies of the
future”48 that push us actively to invent other futures.
Zielinski’s methodology offers a curious paradox in terms of the general paleontological framing. The deep time metaphor acts as a passage
to map different times and spaces of media art history. Even the term con­
notes the darker underground of hidden fluxes that surface only irregularly to give a taste of the underbelly of a deep media history.49 They offer
variation in the sense Zielinski is after in media variantology: media do not
progress from simple to complex, there are no blueprints for prediction,

Parikka.indd 42

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  43

and we need to steer clear of the “psychopathia medialis” of standardization and find points of variation to promote diversity. This is not meant
to signal conservation but active diversification as tactics of a living cultural heritage of technological pasts in the present-­futures.50
In any case, though this is fascinating, I would carefully suggest picking up on the more concrete geological implications of Zielinski’s metaphorics. With a theoretical hard hat on, I wonder if there is actually more
to be found in this use of the notion of deep time both as temporality
and geological materiality. Perhaps this renewed use is what offers a variation that attaches the concepts back to discussions concerning media
materialism and the political geology of contemporary media culture
reliant on the metals and minerals of the earth. Hence the earth time
gradually systematized by Hutton and other geotheorists of his period
sustains the media time in which we are interested. In other words, the
heat engine cosmology of earth times that Hutton provides as a starting point for a media art historical theory of later times is one that also
implicitly contains other aspects we need to reemphasize in the context
of the Anthropocene: the machine of the earth is one that lives of its
energy sources, in a similar way that our media devices and political econ­
omy of digital culture are dependent on energy (cloud computing is still to
a large extent powered by carbon emission–­heavy energy production51)
and materials (metals, minerals, and a long list of refined and synthetic
components). The earth is a machine of variation, and media can live off
variation—­but both are machines that need energy and are tied together
in their dynamic feedback loop. Electronic waste is one of the examples
of the ways in which media feed back to the earth history and future fossil times.
The main question that Zielinski’s argument raises is this: besides
the media variantological account concerning the design of apparatuses,
users, desires, expressions, and different ways of processing the social
order and means of seeing and hearing, there is this other deep time
too. This sort of an alternative is more literal in the sense of returning
to the geological stratifications and a Professor Challenger type of an
excavation deeper into the living ground. The geological interest since
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries produced what was later coined
“deep time,” but we need to be able to understand that a new mapping

Parikka.indd 43

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

44  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

of geology and the earth’s resources was the political economic function
of this emerging epistemology. This is where the archaeological and geological interests of knowledge reveal the other sides of the deep times as
exposing the earth as part of new connections. Indeed, the knowledge of
the planet through geological specimens (demonstrated, for instance, in
Diderot and D’Alembert’s “Mineral Loads or Veins and Their Bearings” in
volume 6 of l’Éncylopedie, 1768) and its newly understood history meant
a new relation between aesthetics and the sciences. This link is also beneficial for new ways of extracting value: “As a result of eighteenth-­century
archeological and antiquarian activities, the earth acquired a new percep­
tual depth, facilitating the conceptualization of the natural as immanent
history, and of the earth’s materials as resources that could be extracted
just like archeological artifacts.”52
The media theoretical deep time divides into two related directions:
	

1.	Geology refers to the affordances that enable digital media to
exist as a materially complex and politically economically mediated realm of production and process: a metallic materiality that
links the earth to the media technological.

	

2.	
Temporalities such as deep time are understood in this alter­
native account as concretely linked to the nonhuman earth times
of decay and renewal but also to the current Anthropocene of
the obscenities of the ecocrisis—­or to put it in one word, the
Anthrobscene.

Deep temporalities53 expand to media theoretical trajectories: such
ideas and practices force media theory outside the usual scope of media
studies to look at the wider milieu in which media materially and politically become media in the first place. This relates to Peters’s speculative question about cosmology, science, and media, which turns into a
short historical mapping of how astronomy and geology can be understood as media disciplines of sort.54 Continuing Peters’s idea, we can further elaborate geophysics as degree zero of media techno­logical culture.
It allows media to take place and has to carry their environmental load.
Hence this geology of media perspective expands to the earth and its
resources. It summons a media ecology of the non­organic, and it picks up
from Matthew Fuller’s notes on “media ecology as a cascade of parasites”55

Parikka.indd 44

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  45

as well as an “affordance,” but itself afforded by a range of processes and
techniques that involve the continuum of the biological-­technological-­
geological.
A Media History of Matter:
From Scrap Metal to Zombie Media
Throughout this book, I am interested in alternative accounts of how
to talk about materiality of media technology. One aspect, with again a
concrete ecological edge to it, is the acknowledgment of the growing
waste problem resulting from discarded media technologies. And another
aspect relates to energy and power: for example, cloud computing is still
rather dependent on nonrenewable energy with heavy CO2 emissions.56
Indeed, what I want to map as the alternative deep time relates to geology
in the fundamental sense of the Anthropocene. Crutzen’s original pitch
offered it as a transversal map across various domains: from nitrogen
fertilizers in the soil to nitric oxide in the air; carbon dioxide and the
condition of the oceans; photochemical smog to global warming. Already
Crutzen had initiated the expansive way of understanding the Anthropocene to be more than about geology. In Crutzen’s initiating definitions,
it turned into a concept investigating the radical transformations in the
living conditions of the planet.
The Anthropocene can be said to be—­in the way the German media
philosopher Erich Hörl suggests referring to Deleuze—­a concept that
maps the scope of a transdisciplinary problem. So what is the problem?
Hörl’s suggestion is important.57 He elaborates the Anthropocene as a
concept that responds to specific questions posed by the technological
situation. It is about the environmental aspects but completely tied to the
technological: the concept as well as its object are enframed by technological conditions to which we should be able to develop a further elaborated insight with the humanities tools and conceptual arsenal. Indeed,
this is where a geology of media offers the necessary support as a conceptual bridge between the materials of chemical and metallic kind and the
political economy and cultural impact of media technologies as part of
the ongoing global digital economy discourses.
The concept of the Anthropocene becomes radically environmental.
It does not mean purely a reference to “nature” but an environmentality

Parikka.indd 45

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

46  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

understood and defined by the “technological condition.”58 The environmental expands from a focus on the natural ecology to an entanglement
with technological questions, notions of subjectivity and agency (as a
critique of a human-­centered worldview), and a critique of such accounts
of rationality that are unable to talk about nonhumans as constitutive of
social relations. The Anthropocene is a way to demonstrate that geology
does not refer exclusively to the ground under our feet. It is constitutive
of social and technological relations and environmental and ecological
realities. Geology is deterritorialized in the concrete ways that metal and
minerals become themselves mobile, enabling technological mobility:
Benjamin Bratton’s words could not be any more apt when he writes
how we carry small pieces of Africa in our pockets, referring to the role,
for instance, of coltan in digital media technologies59 and when the visual
artist Paglen sees the geo-orbital layers of satellite debris as outer reaches
of earth’s geology and the Anthropocene (The Last Pictures project; see
chapter 5).
Besides Africa, iPhones are, in the words of mammolith, an archi­
tectural research and design platform, “geological extracts” drawing from
the planet’s resources and supported by a multiplicity of infrastructures.
The geological bits you carry around are not restricted to samples of
Africa but include the material from Red Dog pit mine in Alaska, from
where zinc ore is extracted and refined into indium in Trail, Canada.
But that’s only a small part of it all, and such sites where material turns
gradually closer to media are “scattered across the globe in the aforementioned countries, as well as South Korea, Belgium, Russia, and Peru.”60 An
analysis of dead media should also take into account this aspect of the
earth and its relation to global logistics and production.
More concretely, let’s focus for a while on China as a territory part of
the global chains of production and abandonment of media technologies.
This geopolitical China is not solely about the international politics of
trade and labor, which are not to be dismissed from the picture. However, we need to be able to think about the geos in this geopolitics too: the
soil, the earth, the waste. In a sense, we can focus on the material production of what then ends up as the massive set of consumer gadgets and
the future fossil record for a robot media archaeologist (see chapter 5 on
future fossils of media culture), but also as discarded waste: both electronic

Parikka.indd 46

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  47

waste and in general scrap metals, necessary for the booming urban
building projects and industrial growth.
Adam Minter’s journalistic report Junkyard Planet offers a different
story of hard metals and work and looks at the issue from the perspective
of geology of scrap metals.61 China is one of the key destinations not only
for electronic waste but for scrap metals in general, offering a different
insight to the circulation of what we still could call geology of technologies. China’s demand for materials is huge. Part of the country’s continuing major construction projects from buildings to subways to airports
was the need to be able to produce—­or reprocess—­more metals: scrap
copper, aluminum, steel, and so on:
On the other side of the mall, in all directions, are dozens of new
high-­rises—­all under construction—­that weren’t visible from the sub­
way and my walk. Those new towers reach 20 and 30 stories, and
they’re covered in windows that require aluminum frames, filled with
bathrooms accessorized with brass and zinc fixtures, stocked with
stainless steel appliances, and—­
for the tech-­
savvy households—­
outfitted with iPhones and iPads assembled with aluminum backs.
No surprise, China leads the world in the consumption of steel,
copper, aluminum, lead, stainless steel, gold, silver, palladium, zinc,
platinum, rare earth compounds, and pretty much anything else
labeled “metal.” But China is desperately short of metal resources
of its own. For example, in 2012 China produced 5.6 million tons of
copper, of which 2.75 million tons was made from scrap. Of that
scrap copper, 70 percent was imported, with most coming from the
United States. In other words, just under half of China’s copper supply is imported as scrap metal. That’s not a trivial matter: Copper,
more than any other metal, is essential to modern life. It is the
means by which we transmit power and information.

The wider picture of technological culture is not restricted to worried comments about the rare earth minerals essential to iPhones. The
bigger picture becomes clear when we realize the extent to which, by
the phase technical media end up disused, they reveal their geology. The
material history of media—­for instance, telecommunications—­extends
to the copper extracted from the wires, removing the outer covers to find

Parikka.indd 47

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

48  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

this mini-­mine of valuable media materials. The history of mining of
copper, with its environmentally dangerous effects, is extended to the re-­
mining from wires for the repurposing of supposedly dead objects. One
could say, following Minter’s narrative, that such a technological history
of materials and material history of media as matter does not really follow the logic of from life of use to death of disuse, but in places such as
Foshan’s Nanhai District, technologies and media materials never die:
it is the place where scrap metal gets processed.62 So despite networking
infrastructure having gradually abandoned copper for materials such
as extruded glass or plastic to compensate for the informationally lossy
metals, the latter have not entirely disappeared in the lighter, glass-­based,
“transparent” cloud computing culture.
In “Zombie Media” (see the Appendix), with Garnet Hertz, we address
the wider context and impact of the “dead media” that refuse to disappear
from the planetary existence.63 It’s the heavier residue of metal technologi­
cal communication media culture. Building on Sterling’s work, we argue
that there is a need to account for the undead nature of obsolete media
technologies and devices in at least two ways: to be able to remember that
media never die but remain as toxic waste residue, and also that we should
be able to repurpose and reuse solutions in new ways, as, for instance,
circuit bending and hardware hacking practices imply. The zombie media
angle builds on two contexts not specific to digital media but present in
such accounts as Goldberg’s and the wider micropolitical stance that ties
consumer desires with design practices. Planned obsolescence is one such
feature art/hacking projects combining hardware hacking and circuit
bending, such as Benjamin Gaulon’s Recyclism, critically highlight as a
persistent feature of contemporary design of technological objects and
systems. Similarly, such approaches take into account the current issue of
abandoned hardware, which even in functional devices reaches amounts
of hundreds of millions of screens, mobiles, and electronic and computing
technologies that still are not properly dealt with after their use. A couple
of years’ old U.S. Environmental Protection Agency statistics talk of 2.37
tons of electronics ready for their afterlife management, which represented
“an increase of more than 120 percent compared to 1999.”64 The primary
category is related to screen technologies, but we can safely assume that
the rise of mobile technologies would soon contribute a rather big share

Parikka.indd 48

28/01/2015 12:46:17 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  49

of this dead media pile, of which only 25 percent was collected for any sort
of actual management and recycling in 2009. The amount of operational
electronics discarded annually is one sort of geologically significant pile
that entangles first, second, and third nature:65 the communicational
vectors of advanced digital technologies come with a rather direct link to
and impact on first natures, reminding that the contemporary reliance on
swift communicational transactions is reliant on this aspect of hardware
too. Communicational events are sustained by the broader aspects of
geology of media. They include technologies abandoned and consisting
of hazardous material: lead, cadmium, mercury, barium, and so on.
National, supranational, and nongovernmental organizational bodies are increasingly forced to think the future of media and information
technologies as something “below the turf.” This means both a focus on
the policies and practices of e-­waste as one of the crucial areas of concern and planning toward raw material extraction and logistics to ensure
supply. As the preceding short mention of scrap metal China illustrated,

Figure 5. The April 2014 excavation in Alamogordo, New Mexico, of the 1983 abandoned
and buried Atari games became a widely publicized form of “media archaeology,” with
connotations relating it to the much bigger problem of dumping electronic waste and
the residuals of game and electronic culture in heaps of rubbish. Photograph by Taylor
Hatmaker.

Parikka.indd 49

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

50  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

the usual practices of mining are not considered the only route for a
future geology of media. In any case, the future geo(physical)politics of
media circulate around China, Russia, Brazil, Congo, and, for instance,
South Africa as key producers of raw materials. It connects to a realization that the materiality of information technology starts from the soil
and the underground. Miles and miles of crust opened up in drilling.
This depth marks the passage from the mediasphere to the lithosphere.
An increasing amount of critical materials are found only by going down
deeper into the crust or otherwise difficult-­to-­reach areas. Offshore oil
drilling is an example, in some cases in rather peculiar circumstances
and depths: the Tupi deposits of oil off the coast of Brazil, beneath one and
a half miles of water and another two and a half miles of compressed salt,
sand, and rock;66 new methods of penetrating rocks, fracturing them,
or of steam-assisted cavity drainage; deep sea mining by countries such
as China; and the list could be continued. Corporations such as Chevron
boast with mining depth records—­tens of thousands of feet under the
ocean bottom67—­in search for oil and minerals. Suddenly an image comes
to mind, one familiar from an earlier part of this chapter: Professor Challenger’s quest to dig deeper inside the living crust that is alive.
Depth becomes not only an index of time but also a resource in the
fundamental sense of Martin Heidegger’s standing-­reserve: technology
reveals nature in ways that can turn it into a resource. For Heidegger, the
writer of trees, rivers, and forest paths, the River Rhein turns from Höld­
erlin’s poetic object into a technological construct effected in the assemblage of the new hydroelectric plant. The question of energy becomes a
way of defining the river and, in Heideggerian terms, transforming it:
The revealing that rules throughout modern technology has the
character of a setting-­upon, in the sense of a challenging-­forth.
That challenging happens in that the energy concealed in nature is
unlocked, what is unlocked is transformed, what is transformed is
stored up, what is stored up is, in turn, distributed, and what is distributed is switched about ever anew. Unlocking, transforming, stor­
ing, distributing, and switching about are ways of revealing.68

This notion of transformation becomes a central way to understand
the technological assemblages in which metals and minerals are mobilized

Parikka.indd 50

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  51

as part of technological and media contexts. Technology constructs such
new pragmatic and epistemological realms where geology turns into a
media resource. And similarly, geology itself transforms into a contested
technologically conditioned object of research and a concept that we are
able to use to understand the widespread mobilization of nature. It also
transforms issues of deep times from a merely temporal question of pasts
to one of futures of extinction, pollution, and resource depletion, triggering a huge chain of events and interlinked questions: the future landscape
of media technological fossils (see chapter 5).
This transformation of geology of media, and media of geology/
metals, works in a couple of directions. Theorists, policy makers, and
even politicians are increasingly aware of the necessity of cobalt, gallium,
indium, tantalum, and other metals and minerals for media technological ends, from end-­user devices like mobiles and game consoles to capacitors, displays, batteries, and so forth. In short, the geophysics of media
consists of examples such as the following:
cobalt: (used for) lithium-­ion batteries, synthetic fuels
gallium: thin layer photovoltaics, IC, WLED
indium: displays, thin layer photovoltaics
tantalum: microcapacitors, medical technology
antimony: ATO, microcapacitors
platinum: fuel cells, catalysts
palladium: catalysts, seawater desalination
niobium: microcapacitors, ferroalloys
neodymium: permanent magnets, laser technology
germanium: fiber-­optic cable, IR optical technologies69

Moments of deep time are exposed in such instances as Clemens
Winkler’s 1885–­86 discovery of germanium (named, of course, after his
home country) and being able to distinguish it from antimony.70 Wink­
ler’s discovery in Freiberg sits as a part of history of chemistry and elements for sure, but it also initiates insights into computer culture, where
the semiconducting capacities of this specific alloy were in tough competition with what we now consider a key part of our computer culture:
silicon. But such deep times are also telling a story of the underground
that is not to be confused with discourse of underground art and activism,

Parikka.indd 51

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

52  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

as we so often revert back to in media art historical discourse. This new
definition of media deep time is more in tune with mining and transportation, of raw material logistics and processing and refining of metals and
minerals. The underground haunts the military imaginary and reality
through the geography of bunkers, guerrilla trenches, and passages (such
as the Vietcong) as well as the nuclear silos that are burrowed into the
landscapes of the United States, for instance;71 it haunts the technological reality of modernity. The underground has since the nineteenth century at least been the site of an imaginary of technological future, as
Rosalind Williams demonstrates,72 but it is also the actual site of technological production.
To reiterate the argument of the chapter, the extensively long historical durations of deep time in the manner introduced to media art discussions by Zielinski take place in antique times, with medieval alchemists,
and in nineteenth-­century science–­art collaborations as exemplary events
of deep time media artistic techniques and ideas. But what if we need
to account for an alternative deep time that extends more deeply toward
a geophysics of media culture? This is a possibility not to be missed: an
alternative media history of matter. Such extends the historical interest
in alchemists to contemporary mining practices, minerals, and the subse­
quent materialities. Would this sort of an approach be something that is
comfortable to tackle with materiality below the ground level,73 stretched
into a continuum between political economy of resources and art practices (as we see in the next chapter in more detail)?
The geology of media that nods toward Zielinski but wants to extend
deep times toward chemical and metal durations includes a wide range of
examples of refined minerals, metals, and chemicals that are essential for
media technologies to operate in the often audiovisual and often miniaturized mobile form, as we have grown to expect as end users of content.
A usual focus on Understanding Media is complemented with the duration of materials as significant for media temporality. Hence media history of matter as well is in its own way another aspect of the geological
deep time.74
The interactions of chemicals, material sciences, and technical media
were never really forgotten in such accounts as Kittler’s. His media historical insights were often aware that material sciences and discoveries

Parikka.indd 52

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  53

have a grounding role in terms of enabling not only media technologies
but also military operations. Hence his attention to such details as a
blockade of Chilean nitrate to Germany75 by the telegraphically effective
British naval troops in World War I unravels as a story the geopolitical
importance of sodium nitrate mining in Chile, the necessary substitute of
synthetic ammoniac by the German chemical innovation of Haber and
Bosch, needed for munitions production. Technologies are matters of
war and logistics, which are ways to mobilize the particular Kittler perspective to a media history of matter:
For over a century, wars and technologies have dreamed of being
ahead of their day. In reality, however, they are forced to engage in
recursions that burrow into ever deeper pasts. Lack of nitrate scuttled Alfred von Schlieffen’s ingenious plan of attack. Just as up-­to-­
date computer design is steadily closing in on the big bang, the
logistics of war (irrespective of wishful ecological thinking) consume ever-­older resources. The Second World War began with the
switch from coal and railroads to tank oil and airplane fuel, the Pax
Americana with the exploration of uranium (in Germany, the task
was assigned to Hans-­Martin Schleyer).76

In this chemical conjunction, history of fertilizers meets history of
war and technological culture. The thousands of years of cultural techniques of manipulating the soil for purposes of agriculture reach one sort
of a singular point by World War I but also show how histories of the
Anthropocene entangle with war and technology, where only the latter
have been discussed in media theory and history. But in this context, as
already hinted at some points earlier, the chemical constitution of techno­
logical culture is not to be neglected. Industrialization becomes a point
of synchronization of the various lineages of cultural techniques. The agricultural metaphor of “culturing” is in the scientific age part of the develop­
ment of chemical means of manipulation of the soil. The soil can be made
fertile, and the history of the geological impact of humans is also about the
isolation of ingredients such as phosphorus (1669), nitrogen (1772), potassium (1807), and, later, nitrogen. The years constitute recent events in
the nonlinear history of the earth becoming adapted to technical cultural
history. The technical–­scientific ties together with the Anthrobscene too:

Parikka.indd 53

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

54  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

“The arrival of industrialization, ushering in the Anthropocene, is marked
by the human ability to move vast quantities of geologic material.”77
Nation-­states and their media-­supported wars are themselves fueled
by material explorations and, to put it simply, energy. But these are wars
with a punctuated imbalance. As Sean Cubitt notes, much of contemporary geological resource hunt and energy race is conditioned by neocolonial arrangements: their targets are in territories traditionally belonging
to indigenous people and “geological resources are sourced in lands previously deemed worthless and therefore earmarked as reservations for
displaced indigenous peoples during the period of European imperial
expansion from the 18th to the 20th centuries.”78 This is a good way of dem­
onstrating that, in some ways, contemporary states—­and corpora­tions—­
are still obscenely modern in their manner of operations. Eviction, massacre, and conquering are part of the normal repository of actions allowed
in guaranteeing resources, as Geoffrey Winthrop-­Young writes.79
Oil is the usual reference point for a critical evaluation of earth
fossils, modern technological culture, and the link between nation-­state
and corporate interests in exploiting cheap labor and seemingly cheap
resources. But of course, it is not the only one. Other materials are also
moved on an increasingly massive level and as an important function in
the militarily secured energy regimes of the globe. Genealogies of logistics, media, and warfare are particularly “Kittlerian,” even if what is missing from his media materialism is often the theme of labor. Indeed, instead
of merely war, we could as justifiably track down genealogies of media
materials to labor processes, exploitation, and dangerous conditions that
characterize also the current persistence of hard work alongside persis­
tence of hardware80 (see chapter 4). Perhaps these two are better indexes
of digital culture than software creativity or immaterial labor.
Conclusions: Cultural Techniques of Material Media
In Thomas Pynchon’s Against the Day (2006), a novel set before the digi­
tal and more focused on the modulation and standardization of processes
of light for the use of technical media such as photography, one gets a
sense of the chemistry of media. Pynchon’s status as part of a theoretical
mapping of history of media and technology has become consolidated
ever since Gravity’s Rainbow (1973) tied together war, technology, and a

Parikka.indd 54

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  55

weird narrative mix of paranoia, conspiracy, and mental states. The V-­2
rocket motivated insights into technology, and science as an essential
part of power relations inspired Kittler and a range of other scholars in
Germany and internationally. In Against the Day, the theme is similar,
but with a focus on light, optics, and chemistry, where especially the latter is what connects to our need to understand media history through its
materials. It is an account that persists from the early histories of pho­
tography, such as geologist–­photographer W. Jerome Harrison’s History
of Photography (1887), which, if you read it through the perspective of
geology of media, becomes a story of chemicals instead of merely the
inventor–experiment­ers such as Niepce, Daguerre, or Talbot: bitumen
(in lithography); tin or, for instance, iodide; lactates and nitrates of silver;
carbon processes; uranium nitrates; and chlorides of gold.81 The history
of technical media is constantly being reenacted in different ways in
contemporary media arts. For photochemical artists, getting their hands
dirty with gelatin and silver nitrates, this is part of the artistic methodology
infused in chemistry: cya­notypes’ aesthetic effect comes down to chemicals (ammonium iron [III] citrate and potassium ferricyanide). A film
artist with a media archaeological bent knows the amount of combination needed in testing and experimenting with chemicals or materials.82
But this knowledge is more of the sort a metallurgist might hold than a
scientist: experimentation in dosage and practice-­based learning of the
materials’ characteristics.83
In Pynchon’s own version of media materialism and optical media,
the list of objects constitutes a sort of a pre–­media technological media
materialism, a list of voluntary or involuntary participants in the process
of technical imaging circa the nineteenth century:
After going through all the possible silver compounds, Merle moved
on to salts of gold, platinum, copper, nickel, uranium, molybdenum,
and antimony, abandoning metallic compounds after a while for
resins, squashed bugs, coal-­
tar dyes, cigar smokes, wildflower
extracts, urine from various critters including himself, reinvesting
what little money came in from portrait work into lenses, filters,
glass plates, enlarging machines, so that soon the wagon was just a
damn rolling photography lab.84

Parikka.indd 55

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

56  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

Besides the object worlds with which the narrative continues—­a world
a speculative realist might call “flat,”85 including a litany from humans to
lampposts to trolley dynamos and flush toilets—­so much has already
happened on the level of chemical reactions. In other words, the media
devices are not the only aspects of “materialism,” but we are as interested
in questions of what enables and sustains media to become media.
In this sort of perspective of deep time geologies and chemistries
of media, one cannot avoid at least a brief mention of the long history of
alchemy. Isn’t it exactly the lineage of alchemy that is of relevance here?
It has meant imbuing a special force to the natural elements and their
mixes, from base to precious: from realgar, sulfur, white arsenic, cinnabar, and especially mercury to gold, lead, copper, silver, and iron.86 The
history of alchemy is steeped in poetic narratives that present their own
versions of sort of deep times (e.g., in pre-­Christian Chinese alchemy87)
as well as occupying a position between arts and sciences.88 In a way, as
Newman notes, alchemy prepared much of later technological culture in
its own experimental way. Developers included a variety of such cases:
Avicenna with his De congelatione (at one point mistaken for a writing by
Aristotle) and scholastic writers such as Vincent of Beauvais, Albertus
Magnus, and Roger Bacon are main examples of early-­thirteenth-­century
practitioners. In Vincent’s Speculum doctrinale, written between 1244
and 1250, one gets a sense of alchemy as a “science of minerals,” a sort
of practice-­based excavation into their transmutational qualities. In Vincent’s words, alchemy “is properly the art of transmuting mineral bodies,
such as metals and the like, from their own species to others.”89
In Against the Day, Pynchon presents his own condensed narrative
prose lineage from alchemy to modern chemistry and technical media.
According to his way of crystallizing the chemistry of technological culture, this transformation in knowledge and practices of materials corresponds to the birth of capitalism, which is characterized by a regularization of processes of material reaction and metamorphosis. In Against the
Day, a dialogue between two characters, Merle and Webb, reveals something important about this turning point from alchemy to modern science:
“But if you look at the history, modern chemistry only starts coming
in to replace alchemy around the same time capitalism really gets
going. Strange, eh? What do you make of that?”

Parikka.indd 56

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

An Alternative Deep Time of the Media  57

Webb nodded agreeably. “Maybe capitalism decided it didn’t
need the old magic anymore.” An emphasis whose contempt was
not meant to escape Merle’s attention. “Why bother? Had their own
magic, doin just fine, thanks, instead of turning lead into gold, they
could take poor people’s sweat and turn into greenbacks, and save
that lead for enforcement purposes.”90

What Pynchon brings into play in this admittedly short quotation is
labor. Besides media histories of matter, such issues link up with histories
of exploitation and capture of surplus value. Indeed, besides a material
history of media before it becomes media, Pynchon is able to highlight
the magical nature of the commodity production related to the novel
forms of “alchemy”: the new magic explicated by Marx as the fetish of the
object hiding the material forces of its production is characteristic of this
aspect, which is usually defined as the material history understood as a
history of labor and political economy. However, we need also to understand the technological and the media elements in this mix, which also
returns to the issue of geology, the earth.
In short, techniques of experimenting with different reactions and
combinations of elements and materials are also media practices. Our
screen technologies, cables, networks, technical means of seeing and hear­
ing, are partly results of meticulous—­and sometimes just purely accidental—experimentation with how materials work: what works, what doesn’t,
whether you are talking of materials for insulation, conduction, projection, or recording. The sciences and the arts often share this attitude
of experimentation and the experiment—­to make the geos expressive
and transformative. The transistor-­based information technology culture would not be thinkable without the various meticulous insights into
the material characteristics and differences between germanium and silicon—­or the energetic regimes—­whether that involves the consideration
of current clouds (as in server farms) or the attempts to manage power
consumption inside computer architectures.91 Issues of energy are ones
of geophysics too—­both in the sense of climate change accelerated by
the still continuing heavy reliance on polluting forms of nonrenewable
energy production and through the various chemicals, metals, and metalloids such as germanium and silicon, media cultural aftereffects of the
geological strata. That is also where a deep time of the planet is inside our

Parikka.indd 57

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

58  An Alternative Deep Time of the Media

machines, crystallized as part of the contemporary political economy:
material histories of labor and the planet are entangled in devices, which,
however, unfold as part of planetary histories. Data mining might be a
leading hype term for our digital age of the moment, but it is enabled
only by the sort of mining that we associate with the ground and its
ungrounding. Digital culture starts in the depths and deep times of the
planet. Sadly, this story is most often more obscene than something to
be celebrated with awe.
In the next chapter, we turn to crystallization as well as continue
on the topic of aesthetics of the geophysics, or, more accurately, the psychogeophysical method of mapping relations of the earth, capitalism,
and technology.

Parikka.indd 58

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

3
PSYCHOGEOPHYSICS OF
TECHNOLOGY
The strata of the Earth is a jumbled museum. Embedded in the
sediment is a text that contains limits and boundaries which evade
the rational order, and social structures which confine art. In order to
read the rocks we must become conscious of geologic time, and of
the layers of prehistoric material that is entombed in the Earth’s
crust. When one scans the ruined sites of pre-­history one sees a
heap of wrecked maps that upsets our present art historical limits.
—­R OBERT SMITHSON

A lesson from the early geological discourse of the eighteenth century:
earth is a massive heat engine. Inside it lies the bursting hot molten core as
a seemingly eternal and yet historically formed source of energy. The rise
and movement of landmasses from the seas is the breath of the earth. What
sounds like the later Gaia theory of the earth as a living entity is already
in limited ways part of the earlier geological discourse. Inhale, exhale. The
soil is a central mediating element. Agriculture cultivates life, but soil is
media—­or like the currently increasing demand for synthetic soil suggests,
“soils are a form of technology.”1 More than two hundred years before the
realization that production of soil might be a great business for the increasingly polluted planet, James Hutton’s worldview is focused on the idea of
the earth as a big machine: it sounds very apt considering that the industrial age is just round the corner. The earth is an old machine and still not
devoid of the Christian connotations and a belief in the intelligent design.
Nothing is accidental but rather is governed through a higher order.
59

Parikka.indd 59

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

60  Psychogeophysics of Technology

Depth means time, but it also means heat. Deep down is the hot core.
The internal heat is one of life that melts the gravel, sand, and other formations under the seabed and consolidates them into rock, to paraphrase
Rudwick.2 The solids are end results of long processes of a natural historical kind. And yet, it is history, but in the sense Manuel Delanda pitches
as a sort of a new materialist metaphysics of metallic affects: metals have
to be accounted as chemical catalysts.3 However, they do not catalyze only
chemical reactions but social, political, economic, and, indeed, media
technological ones too.
The previous chapter outlined some ideas for an alternative deep
time of the media. It was a start at least. My suggestion in this book is
to excavate this deep layer of media technologies that, besides connotations of depth (the reality of mines as essential to existence of contemporary technological culture), points toward temporalities: the rethinking
of what media historical times count as part of our analysis—­the long-­
term durations of geological formations, of mineralization across millions of years, as well as the millions of years of decomposition of fossils
to form the fossil fuel layers essential for the modern technological world.
We also have to account for the effects on the climate in broadest terms
and the way in which media technologies play a double role. This double
role is articulated as follows:
	

1	Media technologies as an epistemological framework, which enable one to perceive, simulate, design, and plan in terms of the
environment and the climate; media compose the framework that
allows us to talk about, for instance, climate change in the way in
which we do nowadays.4

	

2	Second, we can consider media technologies as the aftereffect,
the afterglow,5 that will remain as the fossilized trace of designed
obsolescence and gadget-­culture, as well as the massive infrastructures around which media function: energy, raw material pro­
duction, and mountains of discarded keyboards, screens, mother­
boards, and other components.

This chapter develops these themes, but with a special connection to art
methods and aesthetics. Indeed, this is again characteristic of the just
mentioned double bind; the enabling aesthetics of even being able to talk

Parikka.indd 60

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  61

about such scales as “the climate” or even its change on a geological time
scale; and the aesthetics of this change as a form of critique that intervenes in and feeds off from the geophysical. This chapter introduces one
of the main concepts of the book: psychogeophysics. This concept and
an art practice or a mix of methods is an expansion of the psychogeographical familiar from the Situationist vocabulary. Psychogeophysics
argues that we need to extend beyond the focus on the urban sphere
to the geophysical for a more fundamental understanding of the modulation of the subject that is stretched between ecologies of capitalism and
those of the earth. This discussion of aesthetics as a pertinent revamping of Situationism—­here a nod is in place to McKenzie Wark’s recent
years of highlighting the relevancy of Situationist theorists, practices, and
themes with a particular eye to some of its neglected figures6—­is taken to
a rather extreme direction that talks about geophysics and media technologies in connection.
The chapter discusses the psychogeophysical “manifesto” (published
in Mute magazine) as an extended “Situationism” of the geophysical
media arts.7 In this context, the conceptual discussion is connected to
some recent art and hacktivist projects, which engage with the provo­
cative concept. Such projects include Martin Howse’s Earthbooth and
Florian Dombois’s Earthquake sonification but also other relevant takes
that address earth durations, sounds, and sensations.
Psychogeophysical Dérives
Questions of aesthetics unfold in a different way if you start to ask them
from a nonhuman perspective. A question of aesthetics—­as a question not
necessarily of art and its value but of perception and sensation—­unfolds
in alternative ways when considering animals. In literature, Josephine the
singing mouse (in Franz Kafka’s short story) is one curious story of such
fictitious animal worlds and aesthetic appreciation, but in biology and
experimental psychology, it is a matter of measurable temporal rates and
thresholds of perception. The rates of perception of different animals
are so very different from the human senses: it is not cognitively or affectively easily accessible how a bird perceives, a fish senses sound, or a
bee is embedded in a different world of color sensations. This brings
the question from philosophy of aesthetics to the fields of physiology and

Parikka.indd 61

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

62  Psychogeophysics of Technology

experimental psychology emerging in the nineteenth century with figures
such as Helmholtz and others taking the front stage with their material
and empirical investigation: how do you measure the objective and physiological thresholds of animals, including humans?8 But what happens if
you start asking such questions from the perspective of the nonorganic?
The memory of a rock is of different temporal order to that of the
human social one.9 Abbé La Pluche in Le Spectacle de la nature (1783)
reminded how “the stones and metals have truly preserved for us the
history of the world.”10 The capacities, embodied modes of sensation,
memory, and time, offer at least partial conditions for a number of aesthetic ideas, which are not restricted to “art” per se but resonate with
issues in geology and astronomy.11 Such broader definitions of media and
aesthetics also allow us to consider the connections of the organic human
bodies in the organic and nonorganic surroundings.
Of course, there are traditions and examples in twentieth-­century art
and philosophy eager to engage with the rock world. Land art, environ­
mental arts, but also such a figure as Roger Caillois prove the case in
point. The quasi-­surrealist Caillois’s fascination with stones sets as part
of his long-­term investment in the mystical but also the wider allegorical
relations with nature. This resulted in a nice collection of rocks (systematized according to categories of bizarre, insolite [unusual], and fan­
tastique) but also a philosophical investigation of the nonorganic, temporality, and myths.12 Indeed, Caillois’s Writing of Stones (1970) hints at
the transition from admiring stones as objects to their transformative
power as well as their archival status as visual media: images of fossil
imprints of long lost, imaginary cities as well as the intimation that in the
rock and the mineral is another force that the stone itself can produce—­a
force of alteration.13 From rocks as objects to minerals, metals, and the
geological strata as forces of production—­from objects of appreciation
and knowledge to enabling catalysts in the way a metallurgical perspective has it—­a metal is defined by what it can do.14
Postanthropocentric discussions concerning aesthetics, technol­ogy,
and the environmental necessitate an inclusion of a new ecology of relations between humans, animals, and the nonorganic. Indeed, as Jane
Bennett notes as a spokesperson for vibrant materialism, “culture is not
our own making, infused as it is by biological, geological and climatic

Parikka.indd 62

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  63

forces.”15 Such an articulation of the postanthropocentric is happening
across a range of fields, including, for instance, animal aesthetics. Matthew Fuller’s “Art for Animals” is exemplary in this case.16 But it also
happens in other formations of art that take into serious consideration
the organic and non­organic realms of perception and sensation. In other
words, perhaps there is an ethical urgency to consider the posthuman—­
the lack of certainty of what constitutes the human brought about by scientific, technological, and ecological forces. Of an increasing necessity is,
as Rosi Braidotti flags, the need to engage with a “planetary, geo-­centred”
perspective.17 In other words, in such accounts and in the psychogeophysical focus of this chapter, I do not engage with an Aesthetization
of Nature that might separate humans from their environment—­a point
Tim Morton also raises in Hyperobjects18—­but with the opposite: to estab­
lish proximity, map the links, the continuum of medianatures19 where the
natural ecology is entirely entangled with the technological one. Morton
refers to this as the viscous quality of hyperobjects, but this chapter talks
of some similar themes from an art and technology perspective.
So indeed the question: how do the soil, the crust, the rocks, and the
geological world sense? It is definitely a dilemma anyone deep into Alfred
North Whitehead would find attractive, but let’s consider it from the perspective of media and aesthetics. How do things like earthquakes and the
tide, electromagnetism and radiation of other sorts, fit in? Those might
be Morton’s hyperobjects, but they also fit with some ways of speaking
and some operations focused on geophysical aesthetics. Perhaps the way
to question these is not through a conceptual metaphysical discussion and
essays but through excursions, walks, experiments, and assays? Indeed,
what if the method is more pertinent to the description of the London
Psychogeophysics Summit of 2010 activities. Instead of a metaphysical
essay on the nonhuman, take a walk outside, for instance, in East London:
The London Psychogeophysics Summit proposes an intense week-­
long, city-­wide series of walks, fieldtrips, river drifts, open workshops and discussions exploring the novel interdisciplinary frame of
psychogeophysics, colliding psychogeographics with earth science
measurements and study (fictions of forensics and geophysical
archaeology). Centred around SPACE, open events include practical

Parikka.indd 63

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

64  Psychogeophysics of Technology
workshops in building simple geophysical measurement devices
from scrap materials, fieldtrips for study and long-­term use of such
devices in the city, measurement and mapping of physical and geophysical data during city-­
wide walks, deployment of strategic
underground networks, fusion of fiction, dérive and signal excursion, studies of river signal ecologies alongside short lectures and
discussions of broad, interdisciplinary psychogeophysical themes.20

The concept of psychogeophysics is introduced as a complementary term to that of psychogeography—­a much more familiar concept
in twentieth-­century art vocabularies following up on the Situationists.
But if the psychogeographical was an analysis of the specific effects of the
urban environment on our senses and affective orientation, then the geophysical twist brings in a stronger nonhuman element that is nonetheless
aware of the current forms of exploitation but takes a strategic point of
view on the nonorganic too. The method might at first seem rather similar: take a walk. Derive and drift, fuse fiction with the places that you
visit, frequent, or just pass by. Approach your surroundings through the
eyes and writings of Pynchon and J. G. Ballard. But don’t think what you
see is the only level of reality—­there is also the invisible and the underground. The underground might open a different way of investigating
the notion of affordance: what enables things to be perceived as they are
designed to be perceived so as to sustain our habits.21 In a Guy Debord–­
Situationist manner, originating from the late 1950s, the psychogeographi­
cal does not denounce the physical landscapes—­after all, the term still
carries with it “geography.” In fact, Debord does not fail to mention “soil
composition or climatic conditions”22 when progressing toward the specu­
lative methodology of psychogeography. The latter is introduced as a
mapping of the habitual patterns of the city life, and it offers ways to find
variations to break and short-­circuit the media–­economic conjunction
of the psyche with the urban environment. However, what follows from
the psychogeographical mission statement are primarily meditations
concerning the urban. Indeed, the urban sphere has been privileged in
later instances too, giving it a special place in the critical methodologies
that offer cartographies of the late modern capitalism—­a capitalism that
suits the spectacle so often fixated on the media cultural condition.

Parikka.indd 64

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  65

Wark does an invaluable job in describing the general idea of the
psychogeographical and how it relates to 1950s thinking of the city (especially Paris), the Letterist International and the relations to art practice of
the dérive. In the hands of Debord and Ivan Chtcheglov, this methodology is not merely a social scientific mapping of the interpersonal stretched
between the objective surroundings and the subjective indoors. Instead,
it is a more radical take on the subjective as a fold that is guided through
such stratified sets of places and vectors. Wark argues how the turbulence of such a geographic is one important condition for the cartography of currents, fixed points, and vortexes.23 The term and its relation to
the dérive contain many implications about productive time and leisure
time. However, let’s first focus on the primacy of the urban and how it is
critiqued in the more recent geophysical variations.
The term psychogeophysics is introduced in 2010 by the London Psychogeophysics Summit Collective.24 In Mute, the collective demands in
a rather manifest way a rescaling of the psychogeographic focus into a
more earthly one: the notion of psychogeophysics is meant to offer a provocative distancing from some aspects of psychogeography. With rather
strong articulations that at times resemble Deleuze and Guattari’s critique of the interior-­and couch-­focused mind-­set of psychoanalytic theory as opposed to the great outdoors of schizoanalysis, psychogeography
is critiqued as being an example of a methodology for the house-­dwelling
mind-­set. It is claimed to be occupied with the civilized urban states of
mind and architecture, of indoors and the urban structured sets of living.
In the view of psychogeophysics, what is ignored are the wider geological
contexts in which habitual life can even start to be structured:
Psychogeophysics; just as the entire weight of the earth conspire
[sic] to pull down suspended objects (gravity; a relatively weak but
keystone force) the human condition is being shaped by the entire
earth: psychology as plate tectonics of the mind.25

The text continues to attack the “INMB (In My Back Yard) region­
alism and general lack of ambition to look beyond the city and beyond
the contemporary” that is seen as characteristic of the psychogeo­
graphical bias. After all, to adopt the tone of the Summit’s manifesto of
psychogeophysics,

Parikka.indd 65

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

66  Psychogeophysics of Technology
cities come and go, neighbourhoods go from bust to boom in cyclical fashion. The psychogeophysical angle, which has everything
going for it, is already deluded by procedural navel gazing (the
big fat belly of the google-­jugend) and an irrational belief in the
supreme objectivity of measurement and raw data.26

Some of the concepts, especially referring to the plate tectonics of
the mind, remind of Robert Smithson’s earthwork art discourse. Especially in his 1960s text “A Sedimentation of the Mind: Earth Projects,”
Smithson introduces language that strongly resonates with the ecological
thought of Gregory Bateson, but in an art and geology context. It’s already
in Smithson’s ideas that one finds a continuity, a topological twist, and a
connection between the mind and the earth that extends into a dynamic
aesthetic relation: of erosion, wearing away, compositions, and decompositions. The brain and the earth share the processual structuration that
expands into what Smithson calls “abstract geology,”27 which also enables
a different way of understanding technology, unrestricted to the actual
technological devices and systems but encompassing the wider field of
materials.
The London Psychogeophysics Summit uses the language of low-­
frequency horror of planetary dimensions alongside connotations of obso­
lescence to summon the image of the world of psychogeophysics. It relates
to the inadequacy of aesthetic methods rooted in the city, shopping streets,
and cozy indoors to actually address the relations of geology and con­
temporary capitalist life. The psychogeophysical cartography is meant to
reveal the tension between the human settlements and the environmental. This force and tension is one that is pitched as more radical than of
green politics; it is one of dimensions that mobilize the Kantian sublime
into a contemporary technological culture perspective:
A mountain is more important than Paris, a volcano is more impor­
tant than Cairo, an earthquake is more important than Dubai, the
geomagnetic north is more important than all cities in the Americas
together. A billion+ years of void, Los Angeles sinks into the ocean
(cataclysm), a billion+ years of void. A billion+ years of void, a garden fence falls to the ground (cataclysm), a billion+ years of void.

Parikka.indd 66

28/01/2015 12:46:18 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  67

Geophysics not geography defines us. Lat/Lon systematics can
not contain earth masses on the move. Mount Fuji does not need
Google.earth.28

Psychogeophysics aims for planetary scales of aesthetics. It can be
seen taking the original Situationist city-­focus born in the urban sphere
of Paris of the 1950s and 1960s to engage with the geophysical as the
uncontained element beyond the urban. Indeed, what Gary Genosko has
referred to as the new four elements, or the mobilization of the elements
of earth, fire, air, and water29 in contemporary biopolitics and environ­
men­tal contexts, is one way of understanding the persistence of the material. The “elemental” is present in Smithson’s pitch for an alternative
to McLuhan’s human-­focused theory of technology, and in Genosko’s
hands, it provides a way to understand how the psychogeophysical might
pan out as part of a wider contemporary field of discussion on aesthetics,
the environmental, and the extended ecological politics.
Indeed, whereas posthumanities discourse has been instrumental
in opening up the humanities to the animal as part of the social and economic field (exploited in various industries) as much as the animal inside
us (critique of anthropocentrism with approaches emphasizing the nonconscious),30 we might need to figure out more specifically the continuum across the organic and the nonorganic. In recent collections, such
as Making the Geologic Now,31 this cartography is present, but the psychogeophysical seems to trigger an alternative field of inquiry in which
some recent art projects and practices offer their version of the manifesto’s message. It is in this sense that psychogeophysics performs the continuums across the biological, the nonorganic, and the social. It can also
offer an ethico-­aesthetic perspective to the minerals inside us and the
metals and rocks out there enabling technological gadgetry—­an abstract
geology.
Hence a range of artworks that actually tap into this geological materialism might be in a key position to open our eyes and ears to something
rather different: they offer visuals and sounds of the nonhumans. Even
Félix Guattari’s language of ecology of the mind seems to pale next to
such tectonic psychological vocabularies, which, however, do not come
without predecessors.

Parikka.indd 67

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

68  Psychogeophysics of Technology

Art of Geology, Machines of Soil
To which regime of aesthetics do geological formations, earthquakes, the
soundscapes of ice melting, or, for instance, the various radiations that
form the electromagnetic sphere belong? What sort of aesthetic vocabularies are at our use when we want to interface the geological and the
human made? The aesthetic discourse, including Immanuel Kant’s Cri­
tique of Judgment, has set a specific way of relating to the outside world,
but more specifically what is of interest is the relation to the geological—­
such a fashion theme especially in the early nineteenth century in Germany and in Britain, fueling literature and philosophy.32 The subterranean
world of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was not merely about
geology and mines, but as Rosalind Williams argues, terms such as the
sublime and fantasy were also part of the imaginary of the underworld.33
This included a fascination with ruins since the eighteenth century, with
the archaeological fever entering painting: Giovanni Battista Piranesi’s
imagery is a good example of the reimagination of the classic Roman
Empire in the late eighteenth century; John Martin’s “The Destruction of
Pompeii and Herculaneum” (1822) is emblematic of the awe-­inspiring hor­
rors of geophysical forces as sublime threats to the human civilization and
contributing to the mythological status of this famous volcanic eruption.
The various images of ruins of abbeys and such are an integral part of
British painting alongside other themes that demonstrate this fascination
with the archaeological, ruins, and the geophysical decay of the urban.34
In the more recent decades of artistic discourse, various suggestions have
paved the way for a reemergence of geology and the great outdoors as
part of critical arts—­not least in landscape art, and for instance geo­
poetics, “concerned, fundamentally, with a relationship to the earth and
with the opening of a world.”35
For sure, a quick glance of the photographic art of landscapes and
geology still reminds of the rather classical aesthetic predispositions that
one inherited from eighteenth-­and nineteenth-­century philosophy and
the contrasting sentiments of measures of man and the immeasurability
of Nature. This was carried over from landscape painting to the technologies of national parks, flagging one sort of a capture of the ideal natural
beauty by means of techniques of reproduction. Richard Grusin argues
that in the American context, national parks mark a technological mode

Parikka.indd 68

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  69

of reproduction of nature.36 This is an idealized set of conditions through
which nature becomes represented as well as enmeshing geography,
geol­ogy, nation building, and aesthetic concerns. Places of geophysical
uniqueness such as Yellowstone Natural Park or the Grand Canyon
became landscapes and environments of geologically loaded aesthetics
already in the nineteenth century. Immanuel Kant’s aesthetic vocabulary
was reemployed by, for instance, Clarence Dutton’s 1882 Tertiary History
of the Grand Cañon District, alongside its Atlas part. In narratives and
images, the Grand Canyon is shifted from discourses of beauty to those
of the sublime—­cognitively inaccessible and well described by Grusin:
Insofar as it is represented in terms that resemble the accretive operation of erosion and sedimentation, Dutton’s account of the epistemology of sublime perception is finally geological. For Dutton,
there is no fundamental difference between his geological and his
literary passages, between his scientific and his aesthetic purposes.37

In Dutton’s prose and images, the landscapes become a geological
cartography of plateaus and strata, of “Jurassic remnants”38 now conveyed
with such aesthetic description and prescription as a sort of an archive
of nature remediated. This idea of the sublime as the aesthetic of the
geological deep time is demonstrated by Rosalind Williams: geological
thought but also the “aesthetic discovery of industrial technology”39 are
supported by this sort of aesthetics in the nineteenth century. Landscape
painting goes hand in hand with birth of geology (as a modern discipline
and a mind-­set).
But in a longer perspective, a lot of the art of the geologic admits the
role of the human in the more than poetic engineering of the planet. This
is a point picked up for years now by the Anthropocene discussions,
and motoring several important aesthetic interventions too. Indeed,
such aesthetic questions are in prime position to raise the substantial
ethical question for humanities: can we remain just-­humanities in an age
of planetary scale engineering and massive changes to the very physical
ground on which we live?
Instead of the Anthropocene, let’s discuss psychogeophysics as a
minor concept. I mean “minor” in the sense of its visibility even in artistic discourse, as well as minor in the Deleuze and Guattarian sense of

Parikka.indd 69

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

70  Psychogeophysics of Technology

gathering forces of the potential, of variation and of deviation: it is an
experimentation finding ambulant potential lines rather than aimed at
establishing an axiomatic Master Set of Principles.40 In our case, the aesthetical question is further removed from sole considerations of art per
se and is more closely about the temporal and spatial conditions in which
perception becomes possible. This sort of perception is, however, partly
removed from the human being into a wider assemblage that takes into
account the wider climatological and geophysical spheres. In this context, Katie Paterson’s installation piece “Vatnajökull (the sound of )” is a
fascinating project, which concretely connects technological infrastructures of transmission with the soundscapes of the geophysical.
Have you ever wondered how glaciers sound? What is the (an)ruf of
the glacier?
An underwater microphone lead into Jökulsárlón lagoon—­an outlet
glacial lagoon of Vatnajökull, filled with icebergs—­connected to an
amplifier, and a mobile-­phone, which created a live phone line to
the glacier. The number +44(0)7757001122 could be called from
any telephone in the world, the listener put through to Vatnajökull.
A white neon sign of the phone number hung in the gallery space.41

Dial-­a-­glacier is a reminder of the acoustic spheres and dislocations
of the slowly melting oceans—­a weird phone call to the geologic sphere of
the planet. Here the transmission media become also a measurement device that allows access to the otherwordly, yet constantly present through
the variety of representations concerning climate change. The melting
ice and the icebergs are signals of a slow change triggering and triggered
by a multiplicity of causalities involving humans, technology, and an odd
heritage of industrial culture. Even soundscapes of oceans are an aesthe­
tic measurement device of the climate change and the arts of the Anthrob­
scene. As a parallel to Paterson’s piece, consider the scientific news about
the rising ocean acid levels causing the change in the acoustic environments too. This is especially affecting whales’ methods of communication across the transmission media of water but is a wider aesthetic index
of change: the oceans and glaciers as acoustic media are inscription surfaces of the industrial period aftereffects and act also as massive geological amplifier of signals. What’s more, especially in the case of acid levels

Parikka.indd 70

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  71

of oceans, it is a sort of a time machine, transporting us back to an earlier
Cretaceous period from 145 (±4) to 66 million years ago.42
The psychogeophysical fascination with tectonics is anticipated by
such artworks as Florian Dombois’s Earthquake sonifications.43 Auditory
seismology presents itself as a time-­critical44 methodology of understanding the geophysical events through establishing a relation between
the ear and the temporal unfolding of earthquakes as sonic processes.
But it also lends itself to a media artistic methodology, an apt example
of what we nowadays call arts–­science collaboration. Psychogeophysics
is anyway a rather minor current in the contemporary media arts scene,
but it is able to speak to the issues of deep seas and deep crust in ways
that actually feel very pertinent. It returns posthuman theory as a sort of
planetary venture that summons what Deleuzians might call a Becoming-­
Earth, and it also challenges the stabilizing and romanticizing notions of
the earth.45
The earth and its geophysical sphere does not stop with the ground
or the underground. It extends as part of the climate and the electromagnetic sphere, brilliantly mapped by Douglas Kahn in his recent Earth
Sound Earth Signal. Kahn’s quirky media history of the electrical arts
goes back to the natural electrics as examples of how the earth participates in the much later projects too, from Alvin Lucier’s brainwaves art
to Joyce Hinterding’s work with natural electromagnetic phenomena.46
Projects emerging in the middle of the twentieth century in the sound
arts established more than just talking about nature or the individual
human being. Instead, connections between the outer space and the brain
were experimentally woven in ways that signal a much earlier phase
of what nowadays is branded as a new focus on the nonhuman realm.
What is more, the media history of early-­nineteenth-­century technological assemblages of measurement of the atmosphere and the earth is the
media archaeological point of departure for so much of later sonic and
electromagnetic arts. It is in this context that one finds the double articulation of technological episteme of knowledge concerning the natural
sphere and its rearticulation in media artistic–­technological practices!47
Reading Kahn, we can understand how both theoretically and media
historically the circuiting of the earth has moved from the underground
upward. As Kahn highlights, the underground of technologies starts before

Parikka.indd 71

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

72  Psychogeophysics of Technology

the avant-­garde of the twentieth century and even outside clandestine
military operations clouded in secrecy: “During the nineteenth century,
communication went underground—­nothing necessarily secretive or sub­
altern, even the most common telegraph and telephone messages followed
a technological circuit that was returned and completed through the
earth.”48 The closed metallic circuit is predated by the open earth circuit.49
The ionosphere became part of international network culture by the 1920s
with radio, outer space after World War II with the beginning of the
military-enabled satellite age. The geophysical communication culture of
technical media is part of an expansion of the circuit: from the underground to above the ground, to the ionosphere where intentional human
messages share the signal space with whistlers, and then the space—­an
extended rim of the Anthropocene (and the Anthrobscene of space junk)
that we discuss further in chapter 5.
Kahn’s account fits in with the geophysical focus on aesthetics I want
to address through the provocations of psychogeophysics. What distinguishes Kahn is his mapping of the energetic history of technical media
circuited with the expanded earth. Natural “things” such as radiation,
electromagnetism, and Earth magnitudes are leaking into art vocabularies
and as such smuggle a bit of the nonhuman into the otherwise often very
human-­centered focus of aesthetics. Indeed, aesthetics becomes twisted
into a different set of questions. It becomes connected to themes usually considered “scientific,” begging the Latourian question: what are the
aesthetics of matters of fact, and in what sort of social and aesthetic
assemblages do we produce something that relates to our usual assumptions concerning knowledge, including scientific?50 But it also returns
the ques­tion: what is it that actually affords our sense of aesthetics and
media anyway? What is the earth and the ground and the ungrounds of
our aesthetics, our perception, our sensation, and the sensibility of the
nonhuman subject?
Earth Computing as
Psychogeophysic Cartography
Kahn’s natural history of media (arts) resonates with the focus of psychogeophysics, although the latter is a rather more unruly practice-­based
endeavor. In the midst of the Anthropocene discussions and ongoing

Parikka.indd 72

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  73

development of the theme of “materiality” in relation to media studies
and new materialism, a range of artists are engaging with this geological
materiality of devices and infrastructures also in ways that connect to
a politics of digital culture. Jamie Allen and David Gauthier’s Critical
Infrastructure project that stemmed from their transmediale 2014 festival residency is emblematic of this investigation of what sustains media
environments (Figure 6). Besides referring to itself as a “media archae­
ology of the present” and “the post-­digital as the infra-­digital or infra-­
technical,”51 Critical Infrastructure adopts the terms and even methods
of geology too. Using geological and architectural survey equipment, the
artist–­technologists investigate what underpins the increasingly invisible
realms of technology: both the subterranean realms of the security and
surveillance industries and the critical materials and their supply chains,
part of the economic security regimes.
More directly related to the manifesto are the experimental projects
by the group microresearchlab (Berlin/London) and, for instance, the

Figure 6. The Critical Infrastructure installation investigated the conflation of geological
machinery and metaphors with the realm of big data mining. Poetically, one could say that
the project infused the social mediasphere with the lithosphere–­pedosphere. Project by
David Gauthier and Jamie Allen. Courtesy of Transmediale/Simonetta Migano
Transmediale/Elena Vasilkova 2014.

Parikka.indd 73

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

74  Psychogeophysics of Technology

Crystal World projects by Jonathan Kemp, Ryan Jordan, and Martin
Howse.52 In recent years, we have seen the three iterations of the Crystal
World (“decrystallization,” “recrystallization,” and the “Crystal World”)
executed in various ways with chemicals, natural elements, and DIY tinkering that brings out a rougher edge to opening up hardware than just
circuit bending. For instance, the Crystal World exhibition—­with its
different versions in Berlin and London—­presented a twisted take on the
periodic table of Mendelev from the 1860s. Mendelev’s table itself was not
only empirical but also speculative, suggesting the rhythmicity of chemical elements.53 Some of these projects are closer to laboratory experiments
than an exhibition. But instead of a stabilization of materials as in scientific processes, they aim to look for variations and the strata of the earth
reterritorialized as technology (see Figure 7).
Through different methods, Howse, Kemp, and Jordan investigated
the process of crystallization and decrystallization as defining digital culture. In this limelight, “computers are highly ordered set of minerals” and
the (de/re)crystallization methods backtrack their material lineages just
like tracking the deep times of geological stratifications. This details the
mineral and metal basis of computational technology (from coltan to gold,
copper, etc.) but also the processes of extracting and constructing. Besides
reproducing the processes of extraction of valuables from discarded tech­
nology, the projects also test as to how far art vocabularies and methods
can go. It sets itself beyond the usual institutional prescriptions as a way
to elaborate the aesthetic method through “construction of high heat
and high voltage synthetic geologies, crystalline signal processing, speculative geophysics, anthropocenic (re-­)fossilizations, and diffracted odic
imaging,”54 where the work of computational hacking becomes reattached
to lineages of alchemy. This is where the base elements—­in this case,
from fungi to mud—­are connected with the supposedly refined evolved
material bits of advanced technologies, such as computers, but ones whose
insides are exposed to what they consist of, for example, copper and aluminum in a constellation of elements of postapocalyptic mood. Besides
workshops, the Crystal World projects such as the one in London are
weird installations of computer culture, which, however, feature the odd
inside-­outs of “rust and lumps of scavenged copper and zinc in a solution
of silver nitrate.”55

Parikka.indd 74

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  75

The Crystal Open Laboratories and exhibitions are psychogeophysical investigations, which establish a link between the technological–­
chemical methods, information technology, and capitalism. The projects
summon the narratives of fiction from Ballard to Pynchon but also a different sort of a material history than we inherited from the Marxist legacy. In these practices, (new) materialist critique becomes embedded in
geological times of crystallization, applied to an understanding of labor
and the specific political economic settings in which material is catalyzed
into information technological machines of reproduction of social relations. This refers to the psychogeophysical cartography, not merely of city
streets, but of the link between architectures of computing (especially
hardware) and the geological strata. Indeed, this is why the Crystal World
projects need to be recognized for what they are: an investigation of the
mineral and substrate materialities as well as the materialities of global
media production. In short, there are multiple sorts of materialities in
play. In this way, the Marxist thesis of living labor being consumed as well
as objectified into dead labor of machines is implicitly rephrased as a
process of crystallization but arguing that such machines are not exactly
dead. They sustain the living geophysical strata inside them, an archaic
trace of a past life that engines the new medium. In this sense, the work
and methodology of Kemp, Jordan, and Howse have an interesting relation to fossils and the archaic level.
One can appreciate the bending of the concept of the medium in this
operation: from a communicational definition of the term, they hark back
to its biological and geological roots, but without neglecting the wider
political economy, which is about mobilization of energies and matter.
Indeed, the political economic is not just “old” materialism compared to
the new science and technological materialism cultural theory nowadays
appreciates. Instead, the projects and psychogeophysics are investigating
the continuum between cultural techniques and materiality of the earth;
of information and its substrates; of the wretched of the earth and their
uses and disuses in media technological settings.
In Martin Howse’s Earthcodes project, the uses and abuses of speculative hardware are taken into a further viscous proximity with the earth.
In Braidotti’s terms, this would be literally a more geocentric take on
digital culture: it approaches the earth as a motherboard and investigates

Parikka.indd 75

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

76  Psychogeophysics of Technology

Figure 7. Jonathan Kemp, Crystal World v. 2.0, 2012. Various precipitation products,
including sulfates and phosphates, after the continuous cycling for six weeks of weak
acid–­Grand Union Canal water over an installation of computer junk and rock ores.
Courtesy of the artist.

practical possibilities of booting your com­puter directly from the soil.
The experimental hardware configuration allows the operating system to
boot from the soil with the custom-­made USB device that can be plugged
into the ground. The resulting “telluric operating system” is one which in
the project acts as a media archaeological excursion to media history as
well as a media geological dig reviving “the use of underground flows of
electricity or telluric currents which were first exploited as generators of
power within the telegraphic communi­cations apparatus of the nineteenth
century.”56 The telluric operating system is a twenty-­first-­century version
of the original since the mid-­nineteenth-­century version discussed “telluric currents” of interest to both the geological discourse and expeditions and the emerging electricity-­based technical media. Media acted
both as based on electricity and also functioning as measurement devices
for existence and demonstration of such Earth circuits and currents.

Parikka.indd 76

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  77

Telegraphists were the media epistemological pioneers of geophysical
investigations.57
Back now in the twenty-­first-century computer culture, the Earthboot device is a tactical way of short-­circuiting the massive global-­level
technological use of the earth and geology in corporate computing. The
Earthboot project stems from a critical realization of the rather vampiric
use of materials for proprietary means, packed as part of the hardware
(Figure 8). The direct link to the substrate of the soil bypasses not only
the usual hardware configurations and boot sequences but also the corporate chain of command—­the “arche” in the sense of the command. Of
course, this is a rather speculative take but exemplary of a cartography of
geology intertwined with media technological capitalism.
The concept of substrate becomes a central part of the computational assemblage. Besides referring to the “complex industrial process to
form an electrical logic gate,” the concept carries a speculative geophysical connotation that is teased out with a Kittler-­influenced58 reference to
Bram Stoker’s Dracula. Software is a process of abstraction, but we need
to consider the substrate in its poetic and yet technical materiality:
Despite software’s abstraction the geological maintains a particular
attraction, as earth substrate, that which surrounds us, our material.
Substrate equally presents a set of economic, political and economic consequences which contrast with software’s lack of coded
visibility, its inevitable “encryption.” Stories such as Bram Stoker’s
Dracula, itself based on an earlier catalogue of fictions, shift the
question of material and substrate to the body. Dracula’s viral code
is enacted at the interface with his substrate, the freshly dug earth
which is transported to London and distributed around the capital;
this infection vector.59

Viral code refers in this context less to work of software agents than
to the substrate.60 In art historical terms, Howse’s contribution to psycho­
geophysics draws also on Smithson’s earth arts and the 1960s discourse
of geophysics in the visual arts. The Earthcodes project refers directly to
Smithson, but the link is rather evident anyway. The entry of metals as
well as chemical processes to the art studio highlights both the use of
materials of geological and ecological significance and also, importantly,

Parikka.indd 77

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

78  Psychogeophysics of Technology

the nontechnological conditions of visual/media arts: for instance, oxidization, hydration, carbonization, and solution, which Smithson coins as
“the major processes of rock and mineral disintegration.”61 Smithson’s
emphasis on this geocentric materiality comes out as a move from industrial mass technologies to what he calls a more fundamental stratum that
can affect our sense of artistic materiality: “The breakup or fragmentation of matter makes one aware of the sub-­strata of the Earth before it
is overly refined by industry into sheet metal, extruded I-­beams, aluminum channels, tubes, wire, pipe, col-­rolled steel, iron bars, etc.”62 This is
a passage, which fulfills the promise hinted by Caillois: rocks, stones, and
broadly speaking the geological, are not only objects of aesthesis, they are
also the potential catalyzer of chemical and technological alterations.
Such a view to geological resources and the geophysical sphere approaches
metals as catalysts.63 Psychogeophysical mapping takes as its object the
way in which metals can catalyze not only new chemical reactions but

Figure 8. Martin Howse’s Earthboot rematerializes land art and Smithson’s abstract
geology in the computer age: it constructs a speculative interface to use earth’s electricity
to boot an alternative computer operating system. Courtesy of the artist.

Parikka.indd 78

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  79

also social and economic relations and clusters. It is a cartography of the
hardwired power relations by following the metallic and chemical relations in speculative art practices. Instead of a cartography of the city, we
are witnessing a cartography of the architecture of the technological that
is embedded in the geophysical.
Some of the psychogeophysics manifesto’s claims are provocative
(but I would claim playful) attacks on the urban focus of the Situationists. It’s not that ecological critique was completely absent from the urban
focus. It’s anyway the case that cities live off and in their geophysical
settings—­cities are transformative, to quote Wark (discussing Chtcheglov):
“[to] lay bare the process by which the city transforms nature into second
nature, in the process making nature appear as a resource for the city’s
consumption.”64 This stance should not be mistaken with a simplistic idea
of a sustainable city, Wark notes. Cities erode, disappear, get digested by
deserts, and crumble in geophysical events like earthquakes, similarly as
a powerful sun flare carrying its electromagnetic pulse would have major
consequences both for electronic communications and infrastructure (e.g.,
electricity). Sometimes we tend to differentiate between the humanistic
focus on place as the meaningful terrain of living and the material terrain,
which reproduces itself through geology, weather, and climate.65 Volcanoes
don’t belong so much to the terrain of our critical theory or cultural geog­
raphy, but there is a need to theorize the geology especially because any
notion of geographic “place” is constantly articulated as much by meaningful acts of signification of inhabitants as it is by the geophysical
forces.66 The urban and nonurban lives are anyway infused with the geophysical, in a parallel manner like our brains, bones, and bodies are infused
with the metallic and mineralization processes that in earth durations
connect us to histories of hundreds of millions of years of planetary time.
But it also means the necessity for a psychogeography or psychogeo­
physics that is able to talk about erasure of place–­space–­terrain, and how
direct or indirect geoengineering has produced terrains through eradication. From war to engineering, Dresden to Hiroshima, one can in a manner of a hat tip to Paul Virilio talk about the aesthetics of disappearance
as pertaining as a geophysical force of technological culture.67
The Situationist methods are able to connect to realms of tech­nology
and computational culture too. Debord’s definitions of the dérive were

Parikka.indd 79

28/01/2015 12:46:19 PM

80  Psychogeophysics of Technology

already ready-­made hacker manifestos of sort. “From a dérive point of
view cities have psychogeographical contours, with constant currents,
fixed points and vortexes that strongly discourage entry into or exit from
certain zones.”68 And Wark continues this passage from Debord, commenting on it: “The dérive discovers these contours. The city is an aes­
thetic practice irreducible to the interests of state or market.”69 Replace
the city with, for instance, the computer, and you have the beginning of a
description and a road map for alternative computing that is keen to find
the breaking points, illegitimate uses, and zones that were being discouraged to enter. The technological machine is an aesthetic practice irreducible to the interests of state or market. Add to this mix the geophysical,
and one is close to understanding the thinking behind the project(s): how
the planetary, geocentric aspects contribute to this technological reality
of machines that are bound to geophysics—­both as a resource and as an
affordance. The underground of deep time (see chapter 2) discovers a
reconnection with the experimental art practices that excavate the literal
underground, the soil, the substrate, but in touch with technological art
practices that speculate with possibilities of bypassing the monopoly
relation to the earth that digital industries’ corporate capitalism is trying
to maintain.
Literary history is filled with fantastic reference points for a geology of media or, more accurately, the geologic impact that cultural studies has to take into account. It ranges from Ovid to Thomas Pynchon’s
cryptic notes: “Behind the hieroglyphic streets there would either be a
transcendent meaning, or only the earth.”70 Pynchon’s line (in The Crying of Lot 49, from 1966) predates Situationism’s similar famous slogan
(“beneath the pavement is the beach”), but one is tempted to establish a
fabricated link in our psychogeophysical context: Pynchon as a psychogeographic cartographer of tech­nological culture—­and in some aspects,
even psychogeophysical, like the notes on permafrost in his recent The
Bleeding Edge (2013) suggest.
The poetic history of geology of media and arts also includes writings on the meticulous arts of mining and metallurgy (not least Georgius
Agricola’s De Re Metallica) alongside stories of copper and alchemy,
mate­rial histories of media, of astronomy and the planetary dimensions,
and of deep times becoming deep space. We were not even able to go to

Parikka.indd 80

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Psychogeophysics of Technology  81

exam­ples such as Trevor Paglen’s fantastic photographic research on the
interlinkages of the mineral with the orbital, but that will follow briefly in
chapter 5.
Pynchon’s note toward the end of Crying of Lot 49 about the hieroglyphic street is a parallel to Caillois’s Writing of Stones. Stones are pitched
by Caillois as a proto-­alphabet, a narrative, an invitation to endless speculation, imagination, fabulation, and fleeting meanings that multiply in
the seemingly immobile face of the rock. Pynchon’s rather dry question is
a useful way to orient in the cultural theory landscape as well. Indeed, what
if we move from the paranoid interest of knowledge adamantly determined
to find meaning, or to fix it to a religious or other transcendent entity to
an active and dynamic reality constantly mobilized in relation to bio-­and
geopolitics of cultural production, but where also geo really refers to the
ground and the underground? It is in a way the move from biblical time
to the deep time and the geological realization of the earth (see chapter
2). Instead of the writings on the stones as hints of a hidden hermeneutic
secret of the past or religious revelation, perhaps they are less signs in the
semiotic sense than signals—­signifying material aspects as part of the
mixed semiotics71 in which geology transforms into media and media
reveals their geophysical conditions.
The nonhuman and the unhuman72 return as tectonics, as earthquakes, as seabeds, layers of waste and synthetic geological formations,
which we address in the coming chapters. It also folds as aesthetics of the
deepest of times as well as what are the most recurring of times: those of
the hieroglyphic inscribed on stones as perhaps a hallucinated meaning,
a warning. In the words of Ovid again, “they penetrated to the bowels
of earth and dug up wealth, bad cause of all our ills.” This is the perfect
one-­liner for the Anthrobscene age.
The next chapter continues on obscenities of hard work and hardware. It moves from the undergrounds and substrates slightly upward to
the surface with dust floating in the indoor and outdoor air. It offers a
focus on the microparticles of dust as vectors for critical new materialist
analysis. This is an expansion of the psychogeophysical mapping too: to
use geophysical case studies, and the entanglement of the nonorganic
with contemporary digital capitalism, as a way to understand some political economic implications of new materialism.73

Parikka.indd 81

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

This page intentionally left blank

4
DUST AND THE
EXHAUSTED LIFE
Each particle of dust carries with it a unique vision of matter, movement, collectivity, interaction, affect, differentiation, composition,
and infinite darkness.
—­R EZA NEGARESTANI, CYCLONOPEDIA

I used to live in the north. Even southern Finland had its fair share
of snow some years, which meant the necessity to bring skis to sports
class and, on alternate weeks, skates. Next to the ice skating rink was
something to which one never really paid attention: the snow depot,
growing from the snow gathered by clearing the streets after snowy
nights. The mounds were sometimes rather big even in such a small town
and perfect natural, although temporary, hills for sliding or building a
snow castle.
I never thought of them as much more than that. I never thought of
them, for example, as glaciers—­as Christian Neal MilNeil suggests we
should.1 He pitches city snow dumps as significant geological constel­
lations. We media theorists are primarily thinking of other sorts of waste
dumps as our fields of research—­from Walter Benjamin’s figure of the
ragpicker to the current interest in e-­waste. But snow is a nonhuman
collector; it is an accumulator that by summer leaves this collection in its
wake. What snow demonstrates, acting as a sort of an inscription surface
or more likely as a mushroom sucking it in, is the heavy air that surrounds us. The geological does not stay on the surface:
83

Parikka.indd 83

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

84  Dust and the Exhausted Life
There is a sediment that hangs in a haze above city streets: a low-­
dose toxic dust of lead and chromates from tire wear, clouds of
carbon soot mixed with hydrocarbon gases and fine particles of
nitrates, sulfates, and other metals from exhaust pipes. At every
stoplight, worn brake linings leave behind microscopic flakes of
copper, zinc, and lead.2

The geological is like a membrane, as MilNeil suggests. Might we
even talk of a psychogeophysics of dirt, waste, and dust of cities? Such
dust from car pollution and other sources leaves a streak on the white
snow as it casts a membrane on outer and inner surfaces. Actually, there
is no white snow—­it rarely stays white for an extended period. The pure
white stuff of imaginaries in advertisements and films does not really exist
that often. Instead, we have dust, which is itself a curious case of a collective assemblage: dust carries with itself minerals and metals across distances.3 But it is also a collective assemblage in the sense that it gathers
a range of social, political, and media issues as part of its mobilization of
materials: “metals and microbes, persistent organic pollutants and pesticides.”4 It’s not restricted to specific regions or winds only but is also extra­
planetary: tons and tons of cosmic dust remind us that we breathe in
the otherworldly, the outer planetary—­organic and nonorganic bodies
suck in dust and chemicals, a realization we learned in the environmental
sciences. Besides dust, our bodies still carry traces of DDT and other
chemicals that have not been used for decades but linger as part of the
environmental chains linking humans, animals, soil, and earth. And it
goes on in other scales too. Ice layers that can be hundreds of thousands
of years old record the chemical transformations of our planet. When it
comes to corals, we can think of them as recording devices reaching back
even millions of years, as indexes of the Anthropocene and, more recently,
the residues of the atomic age (measurable in, for instance, carbon-­14
concentration in the atmosphere and in corals):
In these rings they have found, for example, that some corals have
recorded the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests of the late 1950s
and early 1960s. Evidence of the Industrial Revolution is also documented, as is the Little Ice Age of the late seventeenth century. And

Parikka.indd 84

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  85

daily rings in coral may also document the gradual slowing of the
earth’s rotation that astronomers first postulated.5

This chapter engages with the microparticles of dust and reads those
in relation to both the earlier themes of the deep time of geophysics of
media culture and its relation to the materialities of human bodies and
labor. Hence this double articulation of the chapter has to do with dust
and exhaustion. The notion of dust transports us to the lungs of miners
and Chinese workers subcontracted to produce digital media components in special economic zones. Health risks entangle with media materialism, dust with speculative realism, which, however, is approached
from a political angle together with Franco “Bifo” Berardi’s notes on the
exhausted cognitariat. This chapter looks at this side of the cognitive capi­
talism, wanting to ground it in more mundane work and material features. Dust narrates the story but in a way that is paying attention to the
nonhuman agency of this narrator. Geology of media can be continued
with dust: not quite of the ground, not quite the atmosphere.
Dust: The Non-­thing
There is something poetic about dust. It is the stuff of fairy tales, stories
of deserted places—­of attics and dunes, of places from so long ago they
seem to have never existed. Dusty books: the time of the archive that
layers slowly on shelves and manuscripts. Marcel Duchamp’s 1920s Large
Glass was a compilation of dust. In a way, he allowed dust to do the work:
a temporal, slow compiling by the nonhuman particles as a work of art
installed at the museum, “a purposeful inactivity.”6 Dust can transform,
even if it can itself easily escape any grip. It is amorphous, even metamorphic, in the manner Steven Connor describes.7 There is also a lot of it.
Nanoparticles are everywhere and form societies unseen and unheard of,
yet they conglomerate on a scale unimaginable to human beings. We are
a minority. They have their say on human things and cover what we leave
behind intentionally or by accident—­obsolescent technologies, wrecks,
and monuments—­which remind us not only of these things themselves
but of the gradual sedimentation of dust. Dust forms geological strata.
Dust marks the temporality of matter, a processual materiality of piling up,
sedimenting, and—­through its own million-­year process—­transformations

Parikka.indd 85

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

86  Dust and the Exhausted Life

of solids to ephemeral and back. It swarms and overwhelms, exhausts
and clouds. “Breathe as deeply as you will, dust will never be depleted.”8
Even lack of breath has something poetically romantic about it. Lung
diseases are after all a sign of the delicate soul and have a long cultural
history. Tuberculosis features in a vast range of examples from a Puccini
opera to Thomas Mann’s The Magic Mountain (1924). The pale tuber­
culotic body feeds the image of the mythical airiness of lungs, blocked by
the disease. It is as if tuberculosis releases the body from matter: “TB is
disintegration, febrilization, dematerialization; it is a disease of liquids—­
the body turning to phlegm and mucus and sputum and, finally, blood—­
and of air, of the need for better air.”9 But the lung-­diseased body is easily
exhausted, lacking in air, gasping for it. It is a tired body, and tiredness is
one key trajectory we should be following as well: a laboring body.
Indeed, some people already take dust seriously—­and not only the
likely underpaid cleaning laborer working at a city corporate office at
5:00 a.m. Dust consists of so many things: hair, fibers, dead skin, plant

Figure 9. Rachel
de Joode, Dust
Portrait, 2014.
Courtesy of the
artist.

Parikka.indd 86

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  87

pollen, and nonorganic stuff like soil minerals. Even dust is metallic, geological. But the other pole is smart. Nanoparticles, smart dust, engineered
tiny things that are able to invade and inhabit organisms as mechanisms
of repair, improvement, and engineering. Smart dust quietly highlights
the world of nonhuman transactions that can facilitate, track, record, and
govern human affairs. We are nowadays fascinated by things minuscule,
mobile, peer networked, and able to calculate, process, and further transmit the data it receives. Dust can be seen in this sense as “the minimum
recognizable entity of material transformation and circulation.”10 But the
archaeology of computational dust goes much deeper into history and
begins with the abacus and the etymological root of the word in abaq,
Hebrew for “dust.” Ancient dustboards were erasable calculation platforms,
writing surfaces. Babylonians and various scholars in the early Islamic
world used this platform, which consisted of “a board or slab spread with
a fine layer of sand or dust in which designs, letters, or numerals might be
traced and then quickly erased with a swipe of the hand or a rag.”11
What if we followed dust as a trajectory for theory—­theory that is
concerned with materiality and media? What if dust is one way to do
geology of media as “dirt research”: a mode of inquiry that crosses institutions and disciplines and forces us to think of questions of design as
enveloped in a complex ecology and geology of economy, environment,
work, and skill. Dirt brings noise, as Ned Rossiter reminds us, and dirt
research can be understood “as a transversal mode of knowledge production [that] necessarily encounters conflict of various kinds: geocultural,
social, political and epistemological.”12 It fits in our emphasis on geology
of media: to track materialities and times of media culture through nonorganic components, entangled in issues of labor, economy, representations, and discourses.
Dust takes us—­and our thinking—­to different places and opens up
multiple agendas. In this case, dust talks to issues of global labor, media
materialism of digital culture, and illuminates how to approach media
materialism through nonhuman nanoparticles. The argument routes itself
through video games to factories, where gadgets are produced, to theoretical excavations in new materialism and speculative philosophy, to
science fiction and the engineering of everyday realities. Dust fills our
reality as well as our fantasies: the various fiction products set in dust

Parikka.indd 87

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

88  Dust and the Exhausted Life

and dunes, with the obvious ecological example of Frank Herbert’s Dune
(1965).
Material things are often mistaken as modest—­their numbers can be
mostly counted—­yet the immodest countlessness of dust signals something else. Are such “things” immaterial? Are they almost like the air, just
a tiny bit heavier? Like gases, they are atmospheric for sure. Dust shares
a lot of qualities with air as well as breath—­they each force us to rethink
boundaries of individuality as well as space. You cannot confine air and
breath in a manner that our more stable contours, like skin, suggest. Peter
Sloterdijk talks of the processes of inhaling and exhaling in this manner—­
as deterritorializations of sorts, like when the child blows her breath into
a soap bubble, exporting a part of herself, externalization, extension.13
Dust, too, must be thought as more of an environmental and atmospheric
quality through which a different spatial and temporal thinking emerges.
Perhaps, then, dust is not just “matter” but something that troubles
our notions of matter. Steven Connor talks of it even as antimatter: “evacuated of air, the gaps between the particles reduced to their minimum—­
hence its muffling, choking effects.”14 Dust also forces us to think of
surfaces—­it exposes them:
At the same time, dust is characterized by a maximum of what
might be called internal exposure, in which the ratio of the surface
area of particles to their internal mass is extremely high. The availability of such a large surface area for chemical reactions accounts
for the effectiveness of powders in forming solutions and suspensions. And, because they have no inside, because they are all a kind
of internal exposure, dust-­like substances can give contours or clarifying outlines to other things. Thus, dust, itself formless and edgeless, can both dissolve form and disclose it, like the snow that, in
the right amount, can give to things a magical new clarity of outline, but passing beyond that point erases every landmark beneath
its featureless drifts and dunes.15

Games of Hardware and Hardwork
Why dust and games? To talk of nonhumans is to talk not only about
things and objects but about long temporal, material, and sometimes

Parikka.indd 88

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  89

even abstract networks—­such as networks of labor relations, which are
abstract but completely real, and also nonhuman in the way in which
dehumanization is at work in contemporary information technology
(IT)-­related practices. Cultural techniques of IT work are not, however,
only techniques of cognitive capitalism, like communication, networking, and creative expression, but the techniques that sustain even the
existence of IT—­in factories, as well as when discarded electronics are
dismantled.
I will focus on two games that address labor, materiality, and IT. The
first and better known of the two takes the user to the world of iPhones,
but not as we experience them in everyday life. Molleindustria’s Phone
Story,16 which is available for Android phones and banned on the iTunes
app store, elaborates the production chains and conditions of work from
the mineral mines to Apple supplier Foxconn’s factories in the “special
economic zone” of Shenzhen; plagued by worker suicides, and indexical
of the wider health issues having to do with aluminum dust that is a side
product of ensuring that our iPads are shiny and properly polished, such
places are the murky unconscious of gadget culture.17 Aluminum itself
is one of the primary chemicals and metals of technological modernity:
its fetishlike shininess defines Italian futurism as much as post–­World
War II automobile culture.18 There is a bitter irony that the residue of the
utopian promise is registered in the soft tissue of a globally distributed
cheap labor force.
A variety of metal and mineral materialities are essential for a wider
picture of digital economy. Some of these are mapped as part of our
awareness of the chemical sides of digital culture—­entangled with issues
of global politics. Good media art examples include Tantalum Memorial
(2009) (Figure 10) and YoHa’s Aluminium project (2008), focusing on the
residue materiality of the metal. Molleindustria’s painfully simple game
creates another map of this darker side of media materiality. This map is
about nonorganic and organic materialities: mining, suicides, electronic
waste, and planned or meticulously scheduled obsolescence form the
perverted side of the attractive, entertaining end device.19 The iDevice is
enabled by dubious labor practices, including child labor in the mines of
Congo; the appalling working conditions, which lead to a number of suicides, in the Foxconn factories in China; and the planned obsolescence

Parikka.indd 89

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

90  Dust and the Exhausted Life

designed into the product, which also contributes to its weighty share of
electronic waste problems. To make game play out of such themes is
to look at the darker, not-­so-­immaterial cultural techniques that sustain
creative cultures of digitality.
As noted in Nick Dyer-­Witheford and Greig de Peuter’s Games of
Empire, Molleindustria games effectively establish procedural critique, a
mapping of the algorithmic logic into which you, as the player–subject,
are sucked into a systematic production of a limited, repetitive, depressive, and oppressive world without an outside.20 What if we mobilize such
critique in relation to the geopolitics of hardware? What if our mobile-­
consumer selves have to be understood in connection with the heavier
burden of hardware, labor, and work processes? For instance, the outsourcing of pro­duction is also an outsourcing of this hardware geology from
the Western perspective to far-­away places. Outsourcing is historically
connected to the emergence of consumer discourses that emphasize the
lightness and mobility of digital technology. But it hides the outsourced

Figure 10. The Tantalum Memorial installation addresses the entangled circuits of
communication, tantalum mining, and the Congolese civil war. Harwood, Wright,
Yokokoji, Tantalum Memorial–­Residue, 2008. Manifesta7 Bolzano/Bozen, Italy, 2008.
Raqs Media Collective, “The Rest of Now.” Photograph by Wolfgang Trager. Reprinted
with permission.

Parikka.indd 90

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  91

hardness. This harder perspective does not downplay the argument concerning games and immaterial labor—­that games as labor involve special
“communicative cooperation, use of networked technologies and a blurring of the line between labor and leisure time,” to use words from Games
of Empire—­but rather flags that supportive mechanism of labor on which
immateriality can exist. This other labor—­of factories, production lines,
and lung diseases—­shows a different notion of immateriality, which takes
the near-­immateriality of “lungs” and breathing as one central conceptual trajectory that offers a paradoxically different pairing in the context
of geology of media.
What if you breathe the heaviest of air? What if you breathe residue of the metals and chemicals of digital culture? Should we speak of
the exploitation of the soul through the contamination of the lungs?
For Franco “Bifo” Berardi, the Italian philosopher, the soul becomes a
way to understand the mobilization of language, creativity, and affect as
parts of capitalist exploitation and production. Soul is the new ground
for exploitation of cognitive capitalism, but it is a material soul that can
also be exhausted:
For a certain period the conquest of extraterrestrial space seemed
to be a new direction of development for capitalist expansion. Subsequently we saw that the direction of development is above all
the conquest of internal space, the interior world, the space of the
mind, of the soul, the space of time.21

This is the world of cognitive capitalism and the cognitariat, which
mobilize knowledge, affect, and other intellectual skills as a production
force to be exploited—­hence the need for careful practices of managing
and organizing such skill sets and the cognitive labor force.22 It is not,
however, the case that the immaterial is without a material basis. Indeed,
in his notes on “Exhaustion/Depression,” Bifo argues that there is a relation between the slumping global economic regime and the psychosphere—­a conjoining of depressions in a manner that clearly implicitly
picks up on Félix Guattari’s ecological thought: that we need to think of
ecology not only through nature but through subjectivity and social relations. Bifo pays attention to the side effects of a brain-­powered cognitive
capitalism and its mantras of creativity by pointing out the increase in

Parikka.indd 91

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

92  Dust and the Exhausted Life

both various psychopharmacological means of mood management and
in mental disorders. He comes to the conclusion that exhaustion and depression are actually the key bodily states through which to understand
creative and cognitive capitalism and the world economy—­the worn-­out
soul cannot keep up with its digital machines.
Bifo argues that the expansionist drive of capitalism no longer only
reaches out for new natural resources but reaches toward the seemingly
infinite creative powers of the human.23 It is in this manner that I want
to continue Bifo’s emphasis on exhaustion, but with a slight caveat: that
this exhaustion should not be mistakenly read as only about the mental
powers of the rather still privileged informational workers, and that digital machines are themselves not understood as infinite or immaterial
either. Instead, digital culture is also sustained by the rather exhausting
physical work in mining, factory production lines, and other jobs that are
not directly counted as part of “cognitive capitalism”—­and the machines
themselves grow obsolescent and die, their remains leftover media-­junk
and future fossils (see chapter 5); and ecological resources are exhausted
as well, part of the increasing demand for minerals and other materials
for advanced technology industries.
But Bifo does also insist on a material notion of the soul. The soul
is a matter of breathing, lungs, and entanglements across scales. Indeed,
we need to understand how the air and atmosphere of digital culture is
one heavy with metals and chemicals, and the ground of digital culture
is opened up for mining operations, such as minerals. The materiality of
minerals and metals, from silicon to coltan, is entangled with the materiality of the lungs. In other words, this is the materiality of the nonorganic
at the hardware end of things and a materiality of hardwork that connects
to the labor sustaining the hardware.
The second game I want to discuss—­iMine—­does not differ much in
terms of its content. Also available on various platforms, iMine focuses
on the difficult life of the coltan miner in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The game is rather simple, and to put it mildly, is rather boringly
depressing in its repetitious content, with action limited to tiring, repetitive gestures on the phone or the keyboard to mine for tantalum. The
game play is different; whereas in Phone Story, the user just touches a
screen, in iMine, the user has to thrust the phone. But more conceptually,

Parikka.indd 92

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  93

and in terms of the narrative, the game touches on what is described by
the game developers/artists as “persistence of hardware”:
All the “magic” that today’s technology offer [sic], ubiquitous computing and networked communities, depends on the reliability of
hardware and physical power and communications infrastructure.
This means that though the experience of electronically augmented
daily life has changed significantly over the past few decades, the
physical conditions which support these new realms of experience
has not. Hardware still has to be made, under precise often difficult
conditions. And hardware is made from materials which all started
out, at one point, in the earth. The closer we get to the origin of the
materials of digital technology, the more difficult the conditions
often are.24

What both games seem to convey is the goalless, helpless situation of
digging and working for hardly any reward. The miner in iMine is mapped
as part of the more abstract flow of mineral prices on the global market
in relation to valuations of tin, tantalum, tungsten, and gold. The game
articulates the repetitious processes of mining as part of the abstract valuations that offer a financial basis for the trade of minerals and fights
against some of the misperceptions of past decades of media theory that
believed that telematics could free us from repetitious and boring work
and release our playful cognitive capacities and transform “the redundant
into the information.”25 Instead, both games remind us of points impor­
tant for any material theory of media: like labor, IT is material. This materiality is made of components—­mineral and chemical—­and will some
day end up somewhere. It won’t just disappear; both ends of this simple
chain include labor and organic bodies, each of which are the registering
surfaces for effects and affects of media.
Media work in and through bodies, or, more widely, through mate­
rials and things. Hence we turn to a different focus concerning what
Friedrich Kittler’s material media theory flagged as Aufschreibesysteme,
or “discourse networks,” which refers to systems of inscription and a
more genealogical account of the term that recalls the axis of Nietzsche–­
Kafka–­Foucault to which Kittler belongs: social instructions are carved
into the flesh by meticulous drilling, which is not only metaphorical but

Parikka.indd 93

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

94  Dust and the Exhausted Life

can also act through the disciplinary power of (media) machines. Bodies
are made docile and behave in certain patterns of gesture and memory.26
The term Aufschreibesysteme originates from a curious case from
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries—­that of Daniel Paul
Schreber, a prestigious German high court judge who was eventually diag­
nosed with paranoid schizophrenia and subsequently spent much of his
time in treatment and in hospitals, becoming a widely discussed case
study for Freud and many others. This was partly because of his book
Memoirs of My Nervous Illness (1903).27 In the peculiar but rather appealing piece of autobiographical prose, Schreber talks of bodies and inscription surfaces for the celestial scribes who write down everything about
him, which for Kittler becomes a way to understand the new effects of
technical media.28 The body becomes passivized into a victim as “divine
nerve rays invade and retreat, destroy organs and extract brain fiber, lay
down lines of communication and transmit information.”29 Such hallu­
cinatory case studies as Schreber’s also produce the body as the locus
of research and as epistemic objects too: for Freud psychic, for Kittler
technological.
Kittler elaborates the idea further in relation to technology and argues
that the focus on “bodies” remains insufficient when it comes down to
the world of technical media. Indeed, such a stance is important in transporting the cultural theoretical vocabulary to take nonhumans seriously;
so far this move has been often in terms of technologies, scientific elements, or what pejoratively has been called a technodeterminist approach
(the media theoretical equivalent to “strangling cute puppies,”30 as media
theorist Geoffrey Winthrop-­Young so aptly and with definite black humor
calls it).
And yet perhaps we can extend that approach back to bodies—­only
not the model of the body adopted from Schreber’s story, which inspired
Kittler to write about technical media. What if we replace Schreber’s tortured body with the focus on underpaid (and mistreated) workers’ bodies
at the hardware end of digital electronic media production as the model
for inscription systems—­sick, vulnerable, sacrificial bodies on the systematic production lines of products where the polished brand has its
direct link to production processes and cheap labor? These bodies are
epistemic objects as well, in the sense that they register the materiality of

Parikka.indd 94

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  95

IT production—­and discarding—­in lungs, brains, nervous systems, and
more. They are indeed inscription surfaces for the “persistence of hardware,” a conceptual turn Sean Cubitt also called for.
One way to make sense of this is to look at it through a chart I have
devised—­what I call a syndrome per metal or chemical chart. So, instead
of celestial scribes that influence through, as well as inscribe upon, Schreber’s body, this chart shows how other sorts of materials are inscribed
on bodies of IT hardware laborers who open up the devices for valuable
materials, such as gold:
Lead. Damages the central and peripheral nervous systems, blood
systems, kidney, and reproductive system.
Cadmium. Accumulates, for instance, in the kidney.
Mercury. Affects the brain and kidneys, as the fetus in pregnant
women.
Hexavalent chromium/chromium VI. Passes through cell membranes,
producing various toxic effects in contaminated cells.
Barium. Causes brain swelling, muscle weakness, and damage to
the heart, liver, and spleen.31

Such a list could be continued, but the preceding is enough to make
the point about the materiality of media technologies and their material
entanglement with our brains and spleens. It also points to the chemical,
metal, and mineral materiality of both hardware and hardwork, and ways
in which we can map those genealogical traces through labor. This is
not merely an issue that has recently popped up with digital media and
the global processes of mining and distribution of labor to cheaper conditions. A lot of hazardous chemicals were effects from mining and the
use of coal and copper, lead from gasoline keeping transport media running, or the sul­fur dioxide air we breathe and cough that characterizes
the atmosphere of modernity, especially in urban areas and across borders as acid rain.32
Besides machines, chemicals facilitate the birth of the modern media
age. Richard Maxwell and Toby Miller point this out brilliantly. Well
supported by the range of research and statistics they are able to mobilize, they discuss the material effects that early print technologies had on
the body and the environment. Besides the toxic by-­products of the

Parikka.indd 95

28/01/2015 12:46:20 PM

96  Dust and the Exhausted Life

nineteenth-­century innovation of processing of fiber for making paper—­
the effects of which I witnessed when I lived on a river next to a paper
mill in Finland—­that directly contribute to massive water pollution and
deforestation,33 consider, for instance, ink. Quite a banal, gray factor when
considering media studies topics that are keener to talk about the semiotics of what the ink stands for, ink is, however, worth considering for its
crucial material role in the emergence of print media. As Maxwell and
Miller write, “the ink was composed of lampblack, turpentine, and boiled
linseed oil—­the first was harmful to the lungs and mucous membranes;
the second to the nervous system, liver, and kidneys; and the third irritated the skin. For most of the nineteenth century, turpentine extrac­tion
and distillation in the southern United States depended on slave labor;
after the Civil War, forced labor became the norm.”34
This mapping of an alternative “Schreber” can be carried over to
more technical media, like the telegraph, too. The effects of media’s mate­
riality as chemistry and as toxicity are evident in considering what was
necessary to sustain such seemingly immaterial communication. Indeed,
just as with our digital communications, which have been consistently
branded with a breath of lightness in marketing discourses and even theoretical writings since the 1980s, illusions of telegraphic immateriality
are inscribed directly on the bodies of workers. Telegraphic communication was naturally based in electricity and, more specifically, the, in media
historiography, often neglected innovation of the battery. Again, to quote
Maxwell and Miller, early batteries were prime examples of “chemical
energy storage” consisting of sulfuric and nitric acid: “Liquid battery acid
helped produce the chemical reaction that generated the electricity, and
as the components (zinc, copper, and other materials, including mercury)
dissolved, toxic gases (nitric oxide in the case of the early Grove cell used
in U.S. telegraphy) were produced.”35
Take a deep breath, inhale: damage to your lungs and mucous membranes and skin irritation. The air you breathe is metallic.
The Residue Elements
Modern media technologies elaborate what we could call “mixed materialities,” similar to the manner of how Félix Guattari talks of mixed semiotics. This idea acknowledges that there are various materialities at work,

Parikka.indd 96

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  97

from practices of labor to production chains and on to the chemicals and
components that compose the technology: these are semiotechnological
arrangements. Indeed, speaking of “new materialism”—­a term recently
suggested to counter the overemphasis on meaning, representation, and
signification—­reminds that we are facing a variety of materialisms. We
are dealing with multiple materialities and contested meanings of what
materiality is: post–Fordist Marxism offers alternatives to German media
theory. Actor-­network theory offers a different set of interests to those
of the feminist materialism of, for instance, Deleuzian scholars such as
Braidotti and Grosz. Affect theory addresses topics of embodiment in new
material ways. Cultural studies have, since the early days of Raymond
Williams, been talking of materialism in relation to practices of cultural
production. Speculative realism is one latecomer to these discussions as
well.36 So-­called German media theory has been instrumental in reframing the materiality of media technologies (see chapter 1): the brilliant stud­
ies of the likes of Kittler and, more recently, Claus Pias, Wolfgang Ernst,
Bernhard Siegert, Markus Krajewski, and others, have shown how we
need a meticulous understanding of histories and practices of science
and technology to understand technical media. However, modern media
is about chemistry too—­it is about components such as zinc and lead and
about systematic health hazards that are directly connected to production mechanisms and conditions of labor.
A lot of the discussion goes under the name of new materialism,
but perhaps we should consider historical materialism of the Marxist
sort as a parallel stream to that. In a critical fashion, Manuel Delanda has
rather aptly pointed out the anthropocentricity in Marx’s theory of value:
“only human labor was a source of value, not steam engines, coal, industrial organization, et cetera.”37 Yet instead of a full-­fledged dismissal, this
actually prompts the necessity to reconsider a postanthropocentric and
a more, in the context of this book, geocentric and nonorganic (from
chemicals and metals to technology/media) appropriation of the issues
of labor, value, capitalism, and depletion of resources.
Marx was very aware of the relation between the soil (advances in
agriculture) and capital. Indeed, we too should be aware of the relation of
the bios to capital, which extends to what Jason W. Moore has called “peak
appropriation,” described as “the long history of enclosure and exhaustion

Parikka.indd 97

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

98  Dust and the Exhausted Life

of coal seams, oil fields, aquifers, and peasantries across the space and
time of historical capitalism. In this light, the chief problem is not ‘peak
everything’ but peak appropriation. Capital’s problem today is not depletion in the abstract but the contracting opportunities to appropriate nature
cheaply (with less and less labor).”38 But of course, there is work, and then
there is hard work: work that does not correspond to the idealized notions
of capitalism of the brain (cognitive capitalism) but cheap, repetitive, and
physically exhausting labor. It is this connection between labor and the
biosphere of which we should also be aware. Labor consists of work and
of working “the biosphere where the time-­scale may be 1 million years”;39
processes of photosynthesis, fossil fuels, and the now-­increasing centrality of rare earth minerals as memories of geological durations but mined
as an essential part of advanced technological information culture—­all
these are part and parcel of the entanglement of materiality of work and
the long-­term duration of the materiality of the earth. For sure, such perspectives are usually only revealed in the critical breaking points of the
normal processes of production to which twentieth-­century philosophers—­
from Heidegger to Gilles Deleuze to Bruno Latour—­continuously referred:
only once things fail, then you start to see their complexity. In our case,
that failure might come on such a scale that it is planetary: the depletion
of resources, from fossil fuels (oil as the obvious case, and the discourse
of peak oil40) to the already mentioned rare earth minerals. To this list let
us add clean water, air, and soil.
Gary Genosko has referred to the Empedoclean four elements of
earth, water, air, and fire as ways to molecularize also the contemporary
realities of material reality where the elements and their new variations
take a double role: empirical and metaphysical. In his reading, relying
on Negarestani, Genosko moves further from an environmental or aesthetic understanding of the elements41 toward a more molecular insight:
how to map the constitution of contemporary issues, including polluted
air, blood-­stained mineral mining, new forms of contamination, and other
mixing of elements into a new planetary machinic phylum resurfacing
from the inherited four:
Wrapped around these elements is the planetary phylum, a great
tellurian cable bunch with its own products: EARTH: electronics;

Parikka.indd 98

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  99

WATER: liquidities like bottled water, which throws forward diagram­
matic intensities in the explosion of plastic debris; AIR: gases (greenhouse) and; FIRE: artificial plasmas and lasers.42

This new mix of things is a way to investigate the elements of the
media technological but also the wider mix of things in which contemporary culture takes place and takes form as part of environmental, political, and economic issues. In terms of dust, as mentioned earlier, it can be
seen as a collective assemblage of materials as well as issues. It covers a
lot of the globe (deserts) and a lot of our obsolescent media but also participates in processes of production of electronic high tech. The YoHa art
project Coal Fired Computers (2010) articulated the entanglement of fossil fuels, miners’ lungs, bronchitis, and emphysema with computer culture
(Figure 11). Coal is one of the most significant energy sources, powering
cloud computing data centers, but also an essential part of com­puter production itself—­as the exhibit points out, “81% of the energy used in a
computer’s life cycle is expended in the manufacturing process, now taking place in countries with high levels of coal consumption.”43 Besides the

Figure 11. A close-­up from the YoHa installation Coal Fired Computers, 2010. Arnolfini,
Bristol, United Kingdom, 2010. “Coal Fired Computer and Tantalum Memorial.”
Photograph by Jamie Woodley. Reprinted with permission.

Parikka.indd 99

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

100  Dust and the Exhausted Life

environmental impact, such a production process is a direct health hazard to the lungs that register the geologically heavy air. It’s about the
breathlessness: “Breathless from the strained vigilance, breathless from
the oppressiveness of the stuffy night-­air,” writes Hermann Broch in The
Death of Virgil.44 The underground culture of mines and mining is essential for an evaluation of not only industrialization but also the elemental Anthrobscene in computer culture. The breathless state of the organic
inscription surface persists, registering the geophysical traces as well as
the dust of mines.
Coal dust is not the only type of dust relevant to this mining per­
spective to digital culture. Silicon dust has been identified as another significant danger to miners.45 In terms of the older (visual) medium of film
stock production, Eastman Kodak’s Park Plant in Rochester, New York,
was, besides being a heavy polluter of the region and a massive consumer
of freshwater, also a place of acid vapors and dust.46 The silver of the silver
screen was at the less glamorous production end of things and produced
serious health effects among workers. In addition, as Maxwell and Miller
elaborate, the other essential material in the early years of cellulose nitrate
film was cotton. Cotton, too, with its dusty media material trail, registered
in the old media workers’ bodies another health hazard, this one named
byssinosis: brown lung syndrome.
Dust covers insides of lungs, and it covers our abandoned electronic
devices. Planned obsolescence ensures that this happens with a quick
turnaround. Dust is also supposed to be kept out from devices defined
by refined electronics and their manufacture: the detailed and laboratory-­
conditioned fabrication processes of computer technology demand a spe­
cific dust-­freeness. As Jennifer Gabrys writes, “electronics are rendered
functionless if they are contaminated with even a speck of dust during
manufacture. . . . Dust threatens the functioning of these machines, yet
dust returns as a definitive mark of the materiality and temporality of
electronics.”47
There is something that feels so obsolete about coal and other dust.
Mines are a central part of this picture of cognitive capitalism and IT too,
as Harwood reminds us, even if they are displaced to locations such as
India and China. Such centrality of metals and minerals was true already
of the earlier media age, with its need for silver and copper, for instance.

Parikka.indd 100

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  101

As for the “new” media? Even “clean” digital media come with a residue
dust: coal-­fired computing that supports the existence of such glossy
products.48 Media are polished, also literally.
Aluminum dust is one of the excess “products” from the manufacture of computerized technology, such as from the process of polishing
iPad cases. The minuscule dust particles already mentioned carry with
them a double danger: they are highly inflammable and, more importantly, they can cause a variety of lung diseases among workers.
YoHa’s Coal Fired Computers provides a good way of understanding
the underground mining perspective to computational culture, and their
Aluminium project from 2008 is a parallel one that relates to the metal–­
chemical composition of technology.49 The project picks up on the imaginary of the aluminum defined by “beauty, incorruptibility, lightness and
abundance, the metal of the future,” mixed together with political realities (futurism and fascism in the Italy of the earlier part of the twentieth
century) and materiality. Aluminum carries and assembles both realms of
imagined meanings and the long trail of material residue, which becomes
a method for the location-­based installation at an Italian aluminum factory of the 1930s, investigating it from a media ecological perspective.
This included both local elements, for instance, the power grid energizing
the factory and the mythology of aluminum as the symbolically national
metal of Italy of the time, alongside the accelerated industrialization
throughout the 1930s and the rather longer and more abstract connections linking aluminum to contemporary concerns of material and technological culture.
The collaboration with the Raqs Media Collective rested on key
terms and methodologies such as the notion of “residue”:
The extraction of value from any material, place, thing, or person,
involves a process of refinement. During this process, the object in
question will undergo a change in state, separating into at least two
substances: an extract and a residue. With respect to residue: it
may be said it is that which never finds its way into the manifest
narrative of how something (an object, a person, a state, or a state
of being) is produced, or comes into existence. It is the accumulation of all that is left behind, when value is extracted. . . . There are

Parikka.indd 101

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

102  Dust and the Exhausted Life
no histories of residue, no atlases of abandonment, no memoirs of
what a person was but could not be.50

The artistic methodology of refinement connects especially to the
resi­due. It refers to the alternative narratives of materials, labor, and imaginaries surrounding the leftovers, resonating with a certain media archaeological spirit of lost paths and losers in (media/political) history,51 but in
this case, it also relates to the metallic geology of media culture. The residue is evident in the theoretical methodology of tracking dust, which
connects new sorts of contexts, stories, and nondiscursive realities. This
refinement does not lead only to the highly functional high-­tech and
scientific material components that quietly constitute the everyday life. It
also resurfaces as the residue that is registered on two “surfaces” deemed
expendable and disposable: human labor and the environment, which both
bear the chemical effects of hardware.
Health risks are just one of the indicators of cost-­saving practices at
the production end of digital culture, but dust can, in this sense, act as
a good trajectory to understand the significance of the nearly imperceptible nonhuman element. This narrativization through residue links up
with the realization of taking dust as one element in the constitution of
contemporary biopolitical and geopolitical reality. It shares some insights
from Negarestani’s idea of the singularity of dust too:
Each particle of dust carries with it a unique vision of matter, movement, collectivity, interaction, affect, differentiation, composition
and infinite darkness—­a crystallized data-­base or a plot ready to
combine and react, to be narrated on and through something.
There is no line of narration more concrete than a stream of dust
particles.52

Such narratives are less linguistic and symbolic chains. The dust
itself carries an affective force that is material and assembles collectivities
around it. Dust does not stay outside us but is a narrative that enters us:
dust has access in every breath inhaled, and it entangles with our tissue.
Indeed, such a material agent of transformation as dust—­whether smart
or just irritating to the lung—­is itself a reminder that there is an excess to
the symbolic narratives.53

Parikka.indd 102

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  103

A Political Economy of Dust and Labor
So-­called new materialism has great philosophical potential to assist in
analyzing dust’s materiality across scales and artistic methods.54 It is able
to offer a cartography of residue. New materialism is also a potentially
vibrant methodology in that it helps to understand agency of nonhuman
particles and the fabrics of materiality in which they function. My media
studies–­biased proposition goes something like this: new materialism is
not only about intensities of bodies and their capacities—­such as voice
or dance, movement and relationality, fleshiness, ontological monism,
and alternative epistemologies of generative matter—­and active meaning
making of objects themselves nonreducible to linguistic signification. I do
not wish to dismiss any such perspectives; I rather want to point out the
specificity and agency in mediatic matter too. New materialism is already
present in the way technical media transmit and process “culture,” and it
engages in its own version of the continuum of natureculture (to use
Donna Haraway’s term) or, in this case, medianatures (see chapter 1).
The dust particle from a polished iPad is a residue of the admittedly
beautiful fetishistic surface; the dust particle is what registers the globalized wage labor relation on the soft organic tissue of the Chinese worker.
Of course—­to paraphrase Ned Rossiter—­perhaps dust is simply a good
indication of the “fantastic power of the commodity-­form to abstract
itself from the experience of labor and life.”55 The clean surface of the
electronic commodity only betrays “the toxic conditions of production
and their effects on worker’s health and the environment.”56 Indeed, if we
want to stick by such terms as the “nonhuman” and the “nonhuman turn,”
and also insist on using new materialisms irreducible to the vocabulary
of atoms, or even forces of production, perhaps we still can think of the
political economy of new materialism too—­where new materialism can
contribute to perspectives on work, waste, and wasting human bodies
as part of work. We need to attend to the material soul, made of lungs
and breath—­and the shortness and time management of breath. The soul
is not just an immaterial, quasi-­mystical entity of immaterial inhaling
and exhaling; it is constantly produced across the body—­this is what
Foucault argues. It is produced as emblematic of incorporeal materialism
and, as such, of what can attach to lungs too. The soul is at work, and the

Parikka.indd 103

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

104  Dust and the Exhausted Life

work leaves its stain on the lung in the heavy air of computer-­industrial
capitalism.
In short, I am trying to work through some themes that are clearly
part of the agenda of media materialism by showing how they gesture
toward a politically significant materialism. This relates to geology of
media through a tracking of the residues and materialities that tie planetary durations, chemical compositions, and media technologies into such
assemblages, which move in different ways than traditional political, aesthetic, or media vocabularies.
As Harwood from YoHa articulates in relation to the activity of matter, materials have their own ability to “recursively unfold possibilities,
transforming the flesh, the social, political and economic. Essentially what
a material makes possible and what it shuts down when it’s ripped from
the earth and it’s [sic] context and contaminates human ecologies.”57 This
is where activity of the material, nonhuman, and nonorganic articulates
itself: as a reality entangled with human concerns. Harwood, while articulating the idea behind the Coal Fired Computers project, makes a point
relevant to the previously discussed contexts of materiality, minerals, and
geopolitics:
The materials also come into existence as a force when the political,
geographical and economic situations are right for them to do so.
Aluminium “needs” Italian Fascism to “need” a national metal, it
“needs” Italy to lack coal, iron and have bauxite instead. Coal for a
long time in the UK was dug from deep cast mines and the shafts
required pumping out which creates the steam engine which in turn
requires more coal and more labor. Tantalum “requires” political
unrest in the Congo, kids playing Sony games.58

We could add various as absurd-­sounding but as real “needs” produced alongside commodity and digital culture production. It is as if the
electronic culture “needs” the increasingly growing e-­waste mountains
with their garbage collectors who are after the valuable materials inside
the machines. Or we could say that digital culture needs the underbelly
of underpaid workers displaced from the center of consumption to the
global south (so to speak), endangering their health in poor working conditions, removed from corporate responsibility by way of subcontractor

Parikka.indd 104

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  105

arrangements. Or we could even argue that the digital capitalism demands
the exploitation of nature through its unsustainable exploitation and
depletion of resources that range from energy (oil) to materials (copper
and others). This should not be mistaken as a deterministic attitude that
would forget the contingency of modes of production; it just flags how
the other, darker sides of production are attached to labor and global
economy.
An afterlife of the machines (see the Appendix) presents one further
“materiality” in our investigative tracking of the nonhuman dimensions
of media culture—­and a focus on media materiality before media devices
becomes another track for the cartography of residue and refinement.
Hence focusing on the materiality of components and the waste of
electronic media suggests the extremely long and uneven networks of
spatial distribution—­and labor distribution—­of media cultures. It oddly
emphasizes the broadening of the markets on a global scale. In some disturbing accounts, such as one by the media rating company Nielsen, the
fact that “more Africans have access to mobile phones than to clean drinking water”59 is seen as a rather unproblematic statistic that cries out loud
for the importance of business opportunities in the technologically revolutionizing African continent. Sometimes dust also equals lack of water.
There is in any case a weird feedback loop between the race for resources
of modern technological society, which started with colonialism and continued throughout the twentieth and twenty-­first centuries: the search for
minerals, metals, and oil across the globe, including Africa, only to return
in the refined form of consumer products and the continent reterritorialized as a business opportunity. In this context of refinement, we need
constantly to ask, what is the residue—­both environmental and human?
Imagine materiality as a multifarious complexity: it is expressed in
the perspective of minerals that are sedimented for millions of years
before being mined by cheap labor in African countries for use in IT
factories. After the short use-­period for which an iPhone is destined, the
device becomes part of the materiality of e-­waste, leaking environmental
hazards into nature through river dumping or incineration. In the latter,
the burning produces toxic vapors that attach to the nervous systems of
underpaid laborers in China, India, and Ghana. Manuel Delanda wrote
of the thousand years of nonlinear history as a proposition to engage

Parikka.indd 105

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

106  Dust and the Exhausted Life

with the long durations of rocks, minerals, biomatter, and language.60 As
suggested in this book, we need to turn that into a million, a billion, years
of nonlinear history—­in the way Negarestani suggests in his work of
theory-­fiction—­concerning petroleum, dust, and other material agencies.
We need to think like new materialists, archaeologists-­cum-­geologists
excavating how the stratified participates in the contemporary biopolitical sphere. This is a media geology of minerals, of chemicals, of soil as
the resource for the active mobilization of those things constitutive of
contemporary media consumer cultures; in short, it is about energy and
the energetic regime that not only seems to have succeeded the industrial
regime of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries but also the postindustrial regime: abandoned paper factories in Finland, after their production
has moved to cheaper locations, are being reused as server farms partly
because of their proximity to water, which acts as a cooling mechanism—­
renewable energy. The digital is a regime of energies: human energy and
the energy needed for technological machines.
To conclude, it is in this context of the materiality of labor and dust
that we need to talk not only of the soul at work but of the lungs at work.
This chapter serves as a reminder of the alternative materialities of technical media culture that tie together issues of political importance and
the murky sides of hardware. Bifo’s reference to the “cognitariat”—­the
class of cognitive, creative, IT-­supported smart labor—­as the “semiotic
labor flow” includes a wider materiality than any loose reference to a virtual class. For him, the cognitariat involves “the body, sexuality, mortal
physicality, the unconscious.” This description resonates with Matteo
Pasquinelli’s call to include both material and darker, libidinal energies in
our accounts concerning media cultures and creativity discourses.61 It is
precisely because of this call that any extended understanding of the cultural techniques and technologies of the cognitariat needs to be able to
take into account not just souls but where the breath comes from. This
includes both the mental labor that is increasingly invested in high-­tech
communicative work processes that consume mental energies and the
lungs violated by dust. It also includes chemicals, minerals, and hardware
as sociotechnical conditions for the existence of IT culture. In Bifo’s
words, “life, intelligence, joy, breathing—­humanity is going to be sacrificed in order to pay the metaphysical debt.”62

Parikka.indd 106

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Dust and the Exhausted Life  107

The lack of breath, whether from dust particles or from the increase
in anxiety disorders and panic attacks, is indicative of the tie between
immaterial labor and the material exhaustion of bodies of nature. Le
Corbusier’s modern fantasy of rationalized, filtered, and optimized “exact
air” in The Radiant City has proven to be a short-­term dream. With a
different focus, Peter Sloterdijk identifies the beginning of the twentieth
century with a specific event of breathlessness, in the early phases of
World War I: “April 22, 1915, when a specially formed German ‘gas regiment’ launched the first, large-­scale operation against French-­Canadian
troops in the northern Ypres Salient using chlorine gas as their means
of combat.”63 Lack of breath, or “atmo-­terrorism” (as Sloterdijk calls it),
escorts the technological twentieth century into the twenty-­first century,
where we continuously face the same danger: not only from state terrorism
but from (in)corporate(d) terrorism across industrial and postindustrial
production—­the twenty-­first century as the century of dust, depletion
of water resources, desertification leading to reduced crop lands. These
issues expose the residues in our modes of production. This is geophysical terrorism.

Parikka.indd 107

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

This page intentionally left blank

5
FOSSIL FUTURES
As rocks of the Miocene or Eocene in places bear the imprint of
monstrous creatures from those ages, so today arcades dot the
metropolitan landscape like caves containing the fossil remains of
a vanished monster: the consumer of the pre-­imperial era of
capitalism, the last dinosaur of Europe. On the walls of these caverns
their immemorial flora, the commodity, luxuriates and enters, like
cancerous tissue, into the most irregular combinations.
—­WALTER BENJAMIN, THE ARCADES PROJECT

Waste like dinosaurs must return to dust or rust.
—­R OBERT SMITHSON

Fossil Production,
Silicon Valley to Shenzhen
This chapter follows the path of geology outward to space. It also moves
from deep times to future times by speculating on the idea of future
fossils, as a future temporality turned back to the current moment. The
fossil is in this sense a question about the contemporary that expands
across multiple times. We are forced to investigate the persistence of the
fossil as a material monument that signals a radical challenge to prevailing notions of time. This happened in the early modern times, with fossils presented as material evidence that was incapable of fitting into the
scheme of biblical time and also challenging views of nature of earlier
scientific heroes such as Linnaeus, who, with his taxonomic mission,
was happy to be referred to as the Second Adam. Outside the world of
adams and eves, in which ways could the future fossils of media waste,
the “anthropocenic (re-­)fossilizations” (see chapter 3) be also such uneven
109

Parikka.indd 109

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

110  Fossil Futures

temporalities that force a consideration of how complex the time of the
contemporary Anthropocene, in its obscenity, is?
If the current fossils from paleontological evidence to the fossil fuel
layers are the things that mobilize the desires of contemporary imagination, how about the fossils we are producing now? What is the layer of
dead matter residue that we are producing as future fossils? The earth is
itself not a stable entity but constantly in a state of process. The body
of the earth is a compilation machine, an assembly line, which offers a
natural history of the changes over past decades of intensive industrial
involvement in our planet. “Things like trash, construction debris, coal
ash, dredged sediments, petroleum contamination, green lawns, decomposing bodies, and rock ballast not only alter the formation of soil but
themselves form soil bodies, and in this respect are taxonomically indistinguishable from soil.”1
The soil bodies are paradoxically unnatural natural formations, which
will assemble the current afterglow of the industrial world and digital
culture into the synthetic geological future. The synthetic future of soil is
enveloped in an environmental context, but it also is related to the fact of
soil becoming a tradable entity, entering into circulation of not only the
earth but also the monetary reality.2
Elements become isolated, analyzed, synthesized, and enter into circulation as deterritorialized bits of information that can be traded in
com­plex, global ways. From soil to minerals to chemicals, their scientific
framing and engineering is also a prelude to their status as commodities.
The four elements persist and yet mutate into hybrid objects telling the
tale of scientific, high-­tech engineered capitalism.3 We have shifted from
alchemy to chemistry. The periodic table is one of the most important
reference points in the history of technological capitalism. The insides of
computers are folded with their outsides in material ways; the abstract
topologies of information are entwined with geophysical realities. The
silicon of the contemporary computer world is one minor indicator of the
other geophysical memories we will leave behind for the future archaeolo­
gists of media and environmental catastrophe. Let’s start with some site-­
specific examples.
First up, a bit obviously, is Silicon Valley. Its brand and impact on
digital economy are for sure beyond doubt, as is the aftereffect of the

Parikka.indd 110

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Fossil Futures  111

chemical leaks affecting the groundwater and releasing, for example,
tricholoroethene. That was already a shock discovered in the 1980s: that
the purified industries of computing were secretly just as dirty as the industrial ancestors that at least indicated danger with their smoke stacks.4
Now the Superfund sites of Silicon Valley remind of this toxic legacy:
instead of the promises of brain-­fueled computer capitalism, one is still
left with the residue of chemicals, toxins, and the materiality of electronic
culture. In the early 1980s, the digital industries were featured as the “oil
business of the eighties.”5 Like oil has had its dirty sides, from environmental pollution to dirty wars, so does the manufacturing industry of
computation get its hands dirty. This includes labor rights violations and
dubious practices where proper laws don’t exist, historically moving
from Silicon Valley to various locations in Asia. But this dirt also includes
chemicals as the geological legacy of digital culture.6 Computer culture
never really left the fossil (fuel) age anyway; the previous chapter spoke of
Coal Fired Computers (YoHa), and in more factual terms, we can remind
that “to produce a two-­gram memory microchip, 1.3 kilograms of fossil
fuels and materials are required.”7
So despite “the digital” carrying continuously the immaterial con­
notations of information, it is and always has been grounded and also
territorialized.8
From prune and orchids to silicon, Silicon Valley changed gradually
over the decades since the 1950s. By the 1980s, it had become a symbol of
a new economy. By 2013, it had become a global brand but not always
celebrated. Only recently, we witnessed the corporate commuter busses
attacked for their symbolic role signaling of the toxic impact it had on
the local areas. From “Fuck Off Google” to more elaborated articulations of the issue, Silicon Valley was not the solution but the problem.
“While you guys live fat as hogs with your free 24/7 buffets, everyone
else is scraping the bottom of their wallets, barely existing in this expensive world that you and your chums have helped create,”9 as one of the
fliers of the protestors attacked. But perhaps the map on which Silicon
Valley finally appeared was not only about the pollution of social and
economic conditions of living. Perhaps there was another map that is invisible to the eye, the underground, which registers another toxicity of
digital culture?

Parikka.indd 111

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

112  Fossil Futures

The underbelly of Silicon Valley is one of toxic capitalism. Of course,
it is not merely a feature of that one specific territory but is also moved
to other places of production of the global digital economy. Indeed,
consider Shenzhen and Huaqiangbei, “the electronics component mecca,”10
as echoes of the Silicon Valley legacy, what has been branded “envi­
ronmental racism and environmental injustice” by Pellow and Sun-­Hee
Park.11
In a certain way, we can consider this legacy in relation to both space
and time: the material production of a massive amount of electronics and
the logistics of their shipments back and forth, as functional, cheaply
produced hardware and to other directions as disused and sometimes
broken obsolete media. The legacy points to the future fossil record for
a robot media archaeologist interested in the paleontology of scrapped
electronics, but it also forces us to consider what is our current relation
to hardware at the moment. This is where death—­but also living deads—­
features as part of current enthusiasm for discardability.
In the midst of the wider excitement for a global digital economy of
software, some business correspondents, such as Jay Goldberg, have realized that hardware is dirt cheap and even “dead.”12 His claim is less related
to the Bruce Sterling–­initiated proposal for a “Handbook of Deadmedia,”
“a naturalist’s field guide for the communications palaeontologist,”13 than
it is to observing a business opportunity.
Goldberg’s dead media business sense is focusing on the world of
super cheap tablet computers he first encounters in China, then in the
United States for forty dollars. For this particular story, it triggers a specific
realization regarding business models and hardware—­the latter becomes
discardable, opening a whole new world of opportunities:
When I show this tablet to people in the industry, they have universally shared my shock. And then they always ask “Who made it?”
My stock answer is “Who cares?” But the truth of it is that I do
not know. There was no brand on the box or on the device. I have
combed some of the internal documentation and cannot find an
answer. This is how far the Shenzhen electronics complex has
evolved. The hardware maker literally does not matter. Contract
manufacturers can download a reference design from the chip

Parikka.indd 112

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

Fossil Futures  113

maker and build to suit customer orders. If I had 20,000 friends and
an easy way to import these into the US, I would put my own name
on it and hand them out as business cards or Chanukah gifts.14

The reduced price of the tablets means widespread availability even
for niche uses: from waitresses to mechanics, elderly people to kids,
tablets could become the necessary accessory in such visions that are
astonished when realizing the business prospects. The visceral reaction
by Goldberg is followed by rational calculations of what it might mean in
the context of digital economy business models:
Once my heart started beating again, the first thing I thought was,
“I thought the screen alone would cost more than $45.” My next
thought was, “This is really bad news for anyone who makes computing hardware. . . .
No one can make money selling hardware anymore. The only
way to make money with hardware is to sell something else and get
consumers to pay for the whole device and experience.15

Even hardware gets drawn as part of the discourse of experience
economy and the immaterial connotations it carries. Hardware seems to
be immaterialized. Goldberg misses the point that hardware does not die,
not even in the Sterling sense of unused dead media that become a sedimented layer of fossils left for quirky media archaeological digging. Instead,
media technologies from monitors to game cartridges are abandoned,
forgotten, stashed away, but retain their toxic materiality that surpasses
the usual time scales we are used to in media studies. Such abandoned
media devices are less about the time of use, or practices of users, and
more the time and practices of disuse. It certainly would be interesting to
write a history of cultural techniques of technological disuse.
Besides moving on from use to disuse, progress to failure, I want to
remind of the chemical durations of metal materiality. Think of this idea
as the media technological equivalent of the half-­life of nuclear material,
calculated in hundreds and thousands of years of hazard; in media technological contexts, it refers to the dangerous materials inside screen and
computing technologies that are a risk to scrap workers as well as nature,
such as the soil.

Parikka.indd 113

28/01/2015 12:46:21 PM

114  Fossil Futures

A utopia of cheap hardware produced in places of cheap labor indicates the creation of a new future layer of zombie media. Hence we can
start to perceive these clusters as producing not only new sorts of gadgets
of consumption, implied new business models, or just economic opportunities but also a layer of fossils of electronics. It means that a list of
things produced equals another list of zombie media future fossils, an
immense quantity of electronic culture that is indicative of new senses
of futurity as well.
Oscilloscopes and multimeters, connectors of every shape and
vari­
ety, LCDs and LEDs, motors, wheels and buttons, resistors,
capacitors, miles of USB cables and row upon row of copper tape,
soldering paste and every manner of specialized glue. Hundreds of
stalls each with hundreds of components organized and displayed
for browsing. You may never have seen a reel of PCB components
for loading into pick-­and-­place machines. At Huaqiangbei you’ll see
thousands upon thousands of them.16

The visual image of immense piles of electronic rubble that the list
provokes is one indication of an attempt to cognitively grasp the scale of
production of digital culture. From visual arts such as Pieter Hugo’s photography of bleak landscapes (see his “Permanent Error” work) to United
Nations reports, there are various overlapping and reinforcing ways in
which different institutions are trying to make sense of the contemporary
conditions of technological waste. Often the images of solitary e-­waste
workers in non-­Western locations, standing next to the piles of dead or
zombie media, correspond to the tropes favored by the written journalistic descriptions: counting the mass of electronic waste per year (last year
around fifty tons globally) or eventually as “a 15,000-­mile line of 40-­tonne
lorries”17 full of phones, computers, monitors, electronic gadgets of all
sorts. The United Nations action-step initiative is in this context a rather
significant and comprehensive attempt to tackle the e-­waste problem
from policy, design, and, for instance, reuse and recycling practices perspectives so as to be able to address the dual issue of waste and critical
material depletion.18
This chapter’s perspective is, however, on fossils. These bodies of
dying media technology are not merely disappearing as part of the soil

Parikka.indd 114

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  115

but constitute a defining mix in terms of their chemicals, hardware elements, metals, and more: something of a different sort of a dying body
than the organic layer that condensates as part of the earth. This layer, we
can speculate, will persist as an odd reminder of electronic culture and its
entanglement with nature. This chapter is a discussion of different art proj­
ects and theoretical debates concerning (media) fossils, a sense of digital
futurity and the temporal scales of digitality. Similarly as the modern scien­
tific interest in fossils in the zoologist Georges Cuvier’s early-­nineteenth-­
century work tied them with the history of earth catastrophes,19 our
chapter and its artistic examples speculate on the future environmental
catastrophe we are producing now in terms of the environmental.
Professor Ichthyosaurus’s Lesson
Fossils have been for a while part of the media and culture debates in
conferences, festivals, and book pages. The deep time perspective on the
earth and its media (see chapter 2) stems from the interest in paleontology. Sterling’s media paleontology of dead media used similar ideas. The
Atari games dump is the widely circulated story of thousands of E.T. and
other game cartridges buried in early 1980s in Alamogordo in New Mexico, turning in 2013 and 2014 into a literal excavation and exhumation of
dead media, even if enthusiasts first had to wait for testing of the landfill
for hazardous chemicals such as methyl mercury, malathion, and DDT
(see Figure 5). In April 2014, through concrete unearthing of media from
the earth, plenty of examples of discarded materials were discovered.
Jennifer Gabrys’s “natural history of electronics” is perhaps the most
elaborated use of the notion of the fossil in the context of digital culture.
She picks up on Benjamin’s methodological focus on dead and decaying
objects as a way to understand the material imaginary of commodity culture. Indeed, as Gabrys points out, Benjamin’s natural history of commod­
ities and capitalism was a paradoxical unnatural natural history, which
focused on the material effects of the itself historically contingent modes
of production and circulation.20
In this context, for Gabrys too,
electronic fossils are in many ways indicative of the economies and
ecologies of transience that course through these technologies.

Parikka.indd 115

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

116  Fossil Futures
Electronics are not only “matter,” unfolding through minerals, chem­
icals, bodies, soil, water, environments, and temporalities. They also
provide traces of the economic, cultural, and political contexts in
which they circulate.21

Fossils have been at the center of the new modern worldview at least
since the nineteenth century: both geologists like Charles Lyell and biologists like Charles Darwin focused on the fossil as an object of analysis
that opened up a book of fragments. The fossil was the buried temporal
object that was a gateway to past times as a monument in the present.
These are signals of the historicity of the planet condensed in the present
and show the earth as a library as well as “a recording medium.”22 The fos­
sil enthusiasm of the nineteenth century was visible in how geology mobil­
ized the earth as a secret treasury of the past, with volcanoes as one source
of disruption that sometimes fold the visible surface with the hidden
depths of the planet. Lyell’s Principles of Geology (1830) preempts with its
early geological scientific touch what Pink Floyd did poetically later with
sound technologies in Pompeii (“Live in Pompeii,” 1971–­72): in the shadow
of Vesuvius and the wake of its magma to depict Pompeii as a place of
frozen time and frozen bodies, but as ways to understand the overlapping
temporalities where the past exists in the present as monument.23 The
magma is in such geological imagination the original time-­based art process, which imprints us images as fossils.24 In later parlance of the information age, we can say that fossils are the data that geology processes.25
But the important thing and indication of the multitemporality of
the fossil layer is really brought to light only in contemporary paleontology, which rethinks fossils through punctuated equilibrium. For Darwin
in Origin of Species some decades later, following Lyell, the fossil record
is like a book with only fragments left; it is only a fragmented part of a
totality that cannot be discovered, and the only things scientists—­and the
contemporary living world—­are left with are traces. However, for our
contemporary scientists, such as Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge,
the fossil layers’ seeming deficiencies, random jumps, and nonlinear nature
are exactly the striking fact that demonstrates the essential: the archaic
and the current are entangled through such fossil monuments. Instead of
a uniform, slow, gradual evolution of the planet, from its geological record

Parikka.indd 116

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  117

to its life, we must consider the possibility of both as punctuated equilib­
rium:26 abrupt changes and relative stasis, or in other words, coexisting
different temporal orders of change, both as real.
Gould’s critical recap of the arguments of early geologists is useful in
conceptualizing the nature of contemporary media fossils. In a way, the
early geologists did a dress rehearsal for the Anthropocene discussions
now, some two hundred years later. Despite shortcomings corrected by
more accurate recent theories of geological time and change, even early
pioneers like Lyell were imagining possible pasts and futures without
humans. This comes out strikingly well in a popular satirical image tar­
get­ing Lyell’s idea of a cyclicality of the geological. De la Bèche’s image
shows a future Professor Ichthyosaurus giving lessons about the past
fossil humans as exotic of a memory as the sauruses discovered by paleontologists in the midst of the nineteenth-­century fossil frenzy (Figure
12)!27 Revisualize this into an image of the future professor showing fossil
remains of not only humans but also their technological extensions. Who
is her audience though?
The mid-­and late-­nineteenth-­century geological imagination was
constantly talking about the future. A fascination with archaeology, geology, and ruins was complemented with an imaginary of future ruins.
Besides the enthusiasm for the archaeological excavations of antiquity,
one was painting future perspectives of the contemporary imagined as a
forthcoming excavation site of similar importance: Joseph Michael Gandy
was invited to paint the Bank of England with a bird’s-­eye view of how it
would look after hundreds of years of decay, abandoned to the mercy of
natural forces. The piece was first exhibited in 1830. About a hundred
years later, a similar fantasy of ruins as a sign of great civilizations was
adopted in the architecture of the Third Reich in Nazi Germany. It was
meant as a demand to build in such a way that leaves only honorable
lasting ruins for future archaeologists: a theory of the value of ruins, as it
was coined by Albert Speer.28
Fiction such as H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine (1895) created the
Morlocks, far-­future inhabitants of the underworld, machine operators
of a slightly human sort. Evolutionary ideas from Darwin to Thomas
Huxley had a penetrating impact on imagining the future of the planet and
human species on and underground of the earth. Besides evolu­tionary

Parikka.indd 117

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

118  Fossil Futures

Figure 12. Professor Ichthyosaurus lecturing to an animal audience on fossilized human
remains. Lithograph by Sir Henry de la Bèche, 1830, after his drawing. Wellcome Library,
London.

remnants and underground life, “the . . . nineteenth century was haunted
by that prospect of future burial.”29 Also in Antonio Stoppani’s pre-­
Anthropocene account from 1873, something of a similar idea was
employed. Besides predicting that new “anthropozoic” era that mankind
had entered, he suggested to speculate “that a strange intelligence should
come to study the Earth in a day when human progeny, such as populated
ancient worlds, has disappeared completely.”30 Instead of the past cyclical
formations returning in new guises, the future holds an alien visitor who
finds traces of the earth molded by modern science. Future geology becomes a narration of “history of human intelligence,” meaning science and
technology growing on top of nature, animals, and plants. It represents a
novel geological periodization projected and then retrojected from the
future back onto our world. Professor Ichthyosaurus’s and Stoppani’s alien

Parikka.indd 118

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  119

intelligences are representatives of this new geology of non-­humankind
that starts in the nineteenth century, not just the twenty-­first-­century
Anthropocene debate.
With Lyell and the birth of geology, we access the periodization of
the earth’s deep time into specific layers and their fossil remains. From
the Paleocene to the Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene, and Pleistocene to the most recent Holocene before the discussed Anthropocene
(or, as I prefer, the Anthrobscene): even if such present seemingly stable
“layers” of uniform process, they are more like singular points indicating
events; they are assemblages of specific fossil materials as well as accelerated by sometimes catastrophic changes.31 Stratification is not necessarily
a smooth, slow process but multitemporal, speeding up, slowing down.
We need to address how fossils, whether of humans, dinosaurs, or
indeed electronics, infuse with the archaic levels of the earth in terms of
their electronic waste load and represent a “third nature” overlapped and
entangled with the first and the second. These various natures of course
refer to how McKenzie Wark has developed the Marxist conceptualization: the second nature is the sphere of consumer goods production
characterized by wage labor relations in a capitalist society as well as the
different modes of alienation that the exploitation of first nature brings
about; the third nature is the logistical vector of information through
which production of second nature takes a new informational pace.32 But
as we see from the existence of media fossils, the spheres of two and three
are as entangled with “first nature” as they are with each other. They are
historically codetermining in a way that defies any clear-­cut differences
between the modern era of industralization and the postmodern era of
information.33 In addition, the material residue of the third nature is visible in the hardware and waste it leaves behind, despite its ability to reach
abstract informational levels; the abstract comes with its underground of
energy costs and environmental burden that we are registering with various scientific and artistic means. If Benjamin already pitched the world
of emerging consumer culture through the concept of “fossils,”34 we can
now ask what sort of fossil layer is defined by the technical media con­
dition. Instead of the sudden apocalypse brought about by Vesuvius, our
future fossils layers are piling up slowly but steadily as an emblem of an
apocalypse in slow motion.

Parikka.indd 119

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

120  Fossil Futures

Telofossils
Media artist Grégory Chatonsky’s Telofossils (2013), a collaboration with
sculptor Dominique Sirois and sound artist Christophe Charles, picks up
on this context of technologies, obsolescence, and fossils. The exhibition
at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Taipei, Taiwan, focuses on the
slow, poetic level of decay that characterizes technopolitical society and
nature. The “future archaeologist” perspective that Chatonsky summons
with immersive affective moods created in the exhibition’s installations is
akin to Manuel Delanda’s figure of the future robot historian that gazes
back at our current world emphasizing not the human agency of innovators but the agency of the increasingly automated and intelligent machine
(as part of the military constellation).35 The future archaeologist in Chatonsky’s installations and immersive narrative is a displacement of the
human from a temporal perspective (the future) and from the Outside
(alien species):
Telofossils is a speculative fiction about this Earth without us. If
another species arrives on Earth in thousands of years, what will it
find? It will uncover from the ground billions of unknown objects
with no apparent use, fossilized. It will certainly wonder why there
are so many of them. A plastic bag can last hundreds of years when
I only have 2,500 weeks left to live. This disproportion between
the human life expectancy and the one of our technical artifacts
gives a new dimension to our time. It will be a material trace for our
memories. Making this absence and this disappearance visible is
the goal of Telofossils, an impossible project.36

The long-­term perspective that starts from banalities of everyday
consumer materials, like the plastic of the shopping bag, is an echo of
Benjamin’s style of narrating culture through its relations with the natural, but it is also embedded in the contemporary political context. In a mix
of spatial narrative through escorting the exhibition viewer–­participant
through the rooms and spaces, Chatonsky creates affective states surrounded by signs, audiovisuals, and technologies of modernity. The mood
management signals of affective atmospheres of the post-­9/11 catastrophe
that brands the past ten years of everyday life in consumer-­surveillance
societies. For Chatonsky, this mix is a necessary way to make sense of the

Parikka.indd 120

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  121

multitemporality of the looming catastrophe: the notion of the fossil
addresses the slow stratification of a synthetic layer of technological rubbish. It refers to the aura of the accident37 that surrounds the technological of past decades and hundreds of years and transposes it to the future.
After the accident that was predetermined as part of the unsustainable
technological modes of innovation, we can realize also why Chatonsky’s
work is about “telo” instead of just “tele” fossils; the “telofossil” hints
more of the implicit “telos” of the processes of fossilization with a dose
of mourning and sadness. Every technological invention is an invention
of specific accidents that accompany it, reminded Virilio. Perhaps this is
the true insight of Chatonsky’s piece—­to unfold speculative teleological
hidden task of technologies as one to record our slow passing away; like
technical media for the first time were able to record the dead and allow
them to speak from the afterlife, they also in the digital form are the projection technologies of this telos: a projection toward the future as the
canvas for the past fossils.
Indeed, for Chatonsky, the double role of technology becomes under­
stood through future as a fossil: in his words, “they participate to the exhaustion of our planet but they also constitute traces of our existences.”38
The material contribution of technologies to the environmental damage
to the planet is matched by their role as carriers of a memory of the
past. They are in this sense “monuments” like briefly mentioned earlier
concerning fossils. By their material duration, they insist on living after
their use period (see again the Appendix to this book). And they also
carry with them the potential to trace the existence of the world that was
around them, including human cultures. It is recorded in the storage
devices of technical media microtemporalities of hard drives (summoned
in one installation piece in Chatonsky’s exhibition through a broken hard
drive) as much as it is in the chemical composition of man-­made artifacts
(Figure 13).
Telofossils is a project about time, and it is pitched as an archaeo­
logical and archival investigation of the future. The ways in which media
archaeology has offered new insights into media cultural temporality
cannot be ignored. Erkki Huhtamo’s way of arguing for the cyclical and
recurring nature of media culture through its narratives and topoi can
be related with Zielinski’s deep times (chapter 2) and Wolfgang Ernst’s

Parikka.indd 121

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

122  Fossil Futures

microtemporal investigations (see chapter 1). Also Kittler’s insistency to
see media history through its material contexts that depict the human
agent only as an aftereffect might need to be radicalized to a media geological history of technology: that Man is the aftereffect of the geological
durations, mineral excavations, metal affects (Delanda), that catalyze tech­
nological reactions and social events.
An archaeology of the future has a double function in Chatonsky’s
work. On one hand, it reminds of the ways in which memory is always
a remediated material event: memory is always a monument and inscription, whether that happens on the random-­access principles of magnetic storage media like hard drives or in the still experimental modes of
storage in biological material like bacteria. The future memories might
be embedded in the archaic materiality of the organic, such as bacteria
and cells. And for certain, the fossilized remains of the past from some
three hundred to four hundred million years ago still burn to make
data cir­cu­late in contemporary network computing and big data mining,
despite the warnings from Greenpeace: the Internet companies “are
powering the twenty-first-­century data centers that are the engine of

Figure 13. A close-­up from Grégory Chatonsky and Dominique Sirois’s installation
Telofossils, 2012. Courtesy of Xpo Gallery.

Parikka.indd 122

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  123

the Internet economy with nineteenth-­and twentieth-­century coal and
nuclear power,”39 demonstrating the com­plex temporal layers of digital
technology itself. New media, archaic power.
On the other hand, Chatonsky’s interest in memories has to do with
the future and what we can imagine. It is about archaeologies of the future,
partly in the sense that Fredric Jameson talks about the link between
imaginaries and modes of social production. Also imagination, and imag­
ination of futures in the plural, is tied to the current economic and politi­
cal contexts. Jameson writes in Archaeologies of the Future, lamenting on
this impossibility to think outside capitalism, “What is crippling is not
the presence of an enemy but rather the universal belief, not only that
this tendency is irreversible, but that the historic alternatives to capitalism have been proven unviable and impossible, and that no other
socioeconomic system is conceivable, let alone practically available.”40
Chatonsky’s way of writing the future fossil layer through the present
concerns in technologically fueled crisis of political credibility—­visible
in the various measures of surveillance, control, and (in)security of the
post-­9/11 planet—­marks it as a work that is, despite the aspects of affective mourning, actually still keen to investigate how to imagine alternative futurities. Hence the fossils of the future are the ones we live among,
and in this speculative fiction, the extrapolation of current technopolitics
is returned to us via memories of the future. This link of present and the
forth­coming is implicitly there in any kind of an apocalyptic future scenario. The question is, why are we imagining now such postextinction
futures, worlds that are mediated and in medias res—­a mediated technological future?
The notion of telofossils as employed by this imagined future is one
sort of a continuation of “paleofutures.” It refers to a transposition of the
speculative and the archaeological fragment to the future and a variation
of the imagined future-­theme. It parallels with the imaginary media discourse as much as it comes close to design fictions as one speculative
methodology of creative practice. Bruce Sterling’s interest in it as “the
reserve of historical ideas, visions and projections of the future”41 is one
clear indication of a field of relevant research, and it would not be far-­
fetched to claim that Chatonsky’s fabulation of the future archaeologist is
one way to extend design fictions. Paleofuturism is most clearly articulated

Parikka.indd 123

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

124  Fossil Futures

in the blog Paleofuture by Matt Novak:42 it maintains a discourse of past
futures that are the fossils of the contemporary—­a perspec­tive on the
speculative nature of scientific and technological discourse in the twen­
tieth century that fuses the times of future and deep time so as to create the weird mixed temporality that brands technological culture. The
emphasis on the current and the new in contemporary media culture
becomes one of the objects of critique: Zielinski’s notes against “psychopathia medialis”43 of standardization and the political critique by Jameson
are important ways to understand what in this chapter and in this book
amount to the environmental geology of media—­the fossils of paleofutur­
ism are the aftereffects of the increasing piles of waste, and the melancholic postapocalyptic scenario painted by Chatonsky likens the future of
the present not to a progress-­inspired myth of cybernetic control of nature
through technology but to a massive accident that happened because of
technology. Virilio, the primary theorist of the accident, spoke also of gray
ecology, which comes with the accelerating tendencies of modern technical media: a reframing of relations and disappearance of distances that
have a fundamental effect on our aesthetic–­ethical stance in the world.44
However, gray is also the color of the covers of hardware and surroundings of the metallic parts as well as plastics, which create a further surface
of the planet. It is another layer that becomes at the same time an historical and geological index of advanced technological culture. This gray
ecology is the ecology of media technical fossils—­telofossils.
The notion of the fossil is a hint at a future grounded in dysfunctional technology: indeed, similarly as in new insights in technology and
repair studies, we need to be able to rethink the modernist fantasies (also
visible in the historical maps of past imaginary futures in paleofuturism)
of technology as clean, smooth, and progressing and replace such with the
primacy of the accident. Scholars such as Steven Jackson and Lisa Parks
have outlined this in brilliant ways. Following Jackson, we need to be also
thinking of future fossils as “exercise[s] in broken world thinking,”45 which
is branded by the post-­9/11 scenarios articulated by Chatonsky’s art and
design practice. If furthermore read in parallel with Jackson’s words, it
means that “we take erosion, breakdown, and decay, rather than novelty,
growth, and progress, as our starting points in thinking through the nature,
use, and effects of information technology and new media.” Hence a truly

Parikka.indd 124

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

Fossil Futures  125

paleofuturistic take on fossilization of mediatic technology starts from
this scenario: things broken down, abandoned, and decaying as part of
the future fossils of medianatures (cf. chapter 1).
Outer Space Fossils
I won’t go into the issues of repair culture, as articulated by Parks, although
it is an important step in acknowledging the geopolitical and postcolonial stakes in this fresh perspective to broken technologies. Instead of
Eurocentric myths, it suggests a different take on media history and
archaeology through its Others and the dysfunctional.46 A focus on repair
is what dislocates the place of technology from the Western emphasis on
a wider set of cultural techniques, including repair, for instance, in Ghana
and Namibia. It also illuminates bigger questions about infrastructures.
Technology is itself an increasingly efficient vessel for establishing neocolonial structures of corporate presence in African countries; from
infrastructure to end users, Africa is the next continent of consumers
for the global corporations. This parallels the other work of technological
development and resources: the corporate rush to the energy and mineral reserves also in Africa.
Fossils present a temporal perspective to current digital culture, and
they can be used to speculate on geographical dislocations of where
we find media practices. The speculation of media fossil futures can be
matched with a different sort of experimental idea that exhibits “a displaced fossil record.”47 Trevor Paglen’s The Last Pictures project (2012)
mobilizes a concrete satellite-­enabled art project but also speculates with
the multiplicity of temporalities that constitute a set of very important
questions in regard to memory, media, and fossils.
In short, Paglen—­known for his politically engaged photographic
work that fuses art, technology, and visual culture—­collaborated with a
set of material scientists to create what the project calls an ultra-­archival
disc (see Figure 14). Its lifetime is designed to surpass what we usually
consider human archival time of some thousands of years and instead
promises a life of billions of years for the one hundred photographs that
are etched onto the silicon wafer.48 It is not a digital artifact in the usual
sense of binary coding of images on silicon, but it brings to mind questions of technological memory and sustainability of the cultural heritage.

Parikka.indd 125

28/01/2015 12:46:22 PM

126  Fossil Futures

Figure 14. Trevor Paglen’s project included the development of a special ultra-­archival
disc. Courtesy of the artist; Metro Pictures, New York; Altman Siegel, San Francisco;
Galerie Thomas Zander, Cologne.

Paglen’s project can be seen as a reference to the 1977 Voyager Golden
Record, which on a phonograph record sent audiovisual material to space.
As Ryan Bishop has wonderfully argued, the Golden Record already constituted an interplanetary media archaeological act in sending the disc
with a stylus to outer space, which, if one day would accidentally happen
to crash back to earth would constitute a piece of dead media returning
from its galactic trip.49 Whereas Bishop tracks the media historical connections of the Golden Record to the analog sound technol­ogies of the
vocoder, revealing links with Laurie Anderson and, of course, Wendy
Carlos, we should also focus on the vessel itself. The medium is the message, but in this case, we can scale up from the obvious medium of the
phonograph and even the constant data traffic between the vessel and the
Deep Space Network to the spaceship itself. Voyager I as a piece of technology will become space junk by 2025, when it runs out of energy and

Parikka.indd 126

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Fossil Futures  127

slowly drifts outside the heliopause as a silent reminder of what happens
when technology stops working and media stop mediating.
Moving from Voyager to EchoStar XVI, Paglen’s satellite project has
various angles through which we could approach it. I am focusing less on
the images and more on the material–­temporal aspects. The speculative
billions of years of future time reminds of the material waste aspects that
such an archival fantasy has. In a way, the existence of an archive meant
for a nonhuman future is itself a meditation on the paradoxical task of
cultural heritage to outlast humans as well as the material and techno­
logical support of the archive itself. In this case, the specially made disc
transported to geostationary orbit with the EchoStar XVI turns our
attention from the object to its support. The system of satellites is one
of rocket-­fueled technological mediation that guarantees that we have
media entertainment on a global scale—­but is also crucial to the military-­
surveillance complex, extending its reach to a scale that makes the earth
a geographical, geopolitical, and geophysical target:
Since 1963, more than eight hundred spacecraft have been launched
into geosynchronous orbit, forming a man-­made ring of satellites
around the Earth. These satellites are destined to become the
longest-­
lasting artifacts of human civilization, quietly floating
through space long after every trace of humanity has disappeared
from the planet.50

The material memory of the earth continues outside its surface. The
extension of technology to space is a sort of return of the various mate­
rials and minerals to a geosynchronous orbit. Besides the orbit of functioning satellites, Paglen turns our attention to the circular temporality of
the orbit slightly higher to that. The junk orbit is one of future media
fossils, which as a project fuses a deep time interest with the technological realities of contemporary geopolitics. The EchoStar XVI itself is an
important media relay for the fifteen years it will continue transmitting
images—­an approximate ten trillion—­but it becomes a different sort of
media object when it is moved to the graveyard orbit of zombie media “so
far from earth that the derelict spacecraft will never decay.”51
It is this slightly higher orbit that sustains a new geological layer
of technological rubbish, media fossils that have a geological duration,

Parikka.indd 127

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

128  Fossil Futures

but not only on earth’s surface or underground. The escape velocity52
exports geological earth in the form of technological artifacts thousands
of miles above the surface, first as a media relay that extends the electromagnetic communication sphere, second as a fossil sphere of dead and
zombie media technologies, which in Paglen’s project are matched with
the time of the solar system. Imagining the orbit and, for example, lunar
space as a ceme­tery illustrates one aspect of how our junk becomes an
odd memorial and part of human cultural heritage outside the earth.53 But
the space, space rocks, or the moon are not only cemeteries—­not of dead
media objects nor of other human remains. In addition, they are like the
earth itself, increasingly imagined (and imaged) as a resource. In a way,
this is not a new phenomenon but more of a rediscovery of earlier interest in space as the next frontier of the sort that escorted the enthusiasm
for a scientific calculation and mapping of the earth into a resource. The
Cold War space race fueled by geopolitical aims, but also mapping the
material constitution of the moon, meant that despite that it was rendered free from military activity (with the 1967 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies), the idea of being able to
stake a territorial claim might have enormous benefit for the military sec­
tor. Similarly as the globe, for instance, around the north pole, is intensively territorialized as a continuation of the Cold War,54 it is no wonder
that an interest in the outerplanetary resources is again resurfacing.
Richard Seymour suggests that “the outer space really is the final
frontier for capitalism,”55 referring both to China’s recent moon mission
and to Rosa Luxemburg’s famous theoretization that capitalism works by
folding its outsides as its resource. The interest in space might be because
of the energy promises in helium-­3, but to be honest, the moon is not the
only rock of interest to the technologically advanced geopolitics of our
times. Also asteroids are important. For instance, platinum, iridium, palladium, and gold are believed be to found in abundant quantities in such
space rocks, but even more important might be water, silicon, and, for
instance, nickel.56 Indeed, companies are able to bypass the 1967 legislation because of their status as private mining corporations, such as Deep
Space Industries or the earlier founded Planetary Resources Inc. (behind
the venture, among other investors, also are Google’s Larry Page and Eric

Parikka.indd 128

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Fossil Futures  129

Schmidt). The focus on asteroids shifts from the narrativization of the end
of life as we know it—­scenarios of apocalyptic proportion of past years of
Hollywood audiovisuals—­and concentrates more on the resource basis
for future technological competition. The interest in geology that has
mapped the earth as a resource leading to the recent years of digital culture devices, hungry for minerals, metals, and energy, is being replicated
now outside our planetary scale. In the midst of the satellites, relaying
massive network transmissions of entertainment and military content, we
have the future plans of geological surveys and mining expanded much
beyond the underground of the earth, from the deep time of the media of
mining its underground to the space of geological objects, within reach
exactly because of the development of advanced (space) technologies.
The Last Pictures establishes an aesthetic framework to understand
this wider context of geology of media reaching outside the globe. In many
ways, we are increasingly conscious of the mediasphere as significantly
defined by the orbital.57 But discussing the orbital in terms of geology—­
both fossils from the dying technological waste and the resources from
asteroids—­is what opens a new horizon for a media materialist analysis.
Paglen makes explicit this link with the geological sphere and the influence
of the Anthropocene reaching out thousands of miles high above earth
itself. His photography has a relation to the resourcing of the geophysical
sphere as part of the geopolitical (military) missions of past decades and
how scientific visual worlds demonstrate the intertwining of aesthetics
with power.
As Brooke Belisle points out, already Paglen’s earlier work, a photographic diptych Artifacts (2010) (see Figure 1), works through relating
geological formations and astronomical space.58 It offers a photographic
argument concerning the nineteenth-­century temporalization of geology
(deep time) and the ongoing spatialization of space (deep space) in a way
that entangles also the extraterrestrial into a geological discourse. Belisle
is able to show the geological connotations of Paglen’s interests: the outer
space and satellite orbits as the future fossils of human-­made space debris
and the focus on the earth’s topology from geological sciences to geo­
engineering of canals and other formations that tied industrialization,
colonialism, and capitalist globalizing logistics to the opening up of deep
time. This supports the argument in this book concerning the deep time

Parikka.indd 129

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

130  Fossil Futures

of the media, of which some of Paglen’s visual themes are good examples.
From the geological strata of Canyon de Chelly in Arizona to the night
sky of strata of light, as traces from satellites, Artifacts paves the way for
the Anthropocene that is further investigated in The Last Pictures. The
historical genealogy of photography shows the close links the new visual
medium had with the mapping of the geophysical; U.S. Geological and
Geographical Surveys were closely linked with the media of visualization
since the nineteenth century, as Belisle brings out in the context of Paglen’s
practice. The geological ground was dug through, mined but also made
flat and into an information surface with the aid of the new technical
medium of photography connected to various other techniques, such as
air balloons and aerial photography.
But besides the aerial, the militarized technological imaginary has as
much been haunted with the necessity of trying to see the underground.
As Ryan Bishop skillfully shows, this penetration of the underground

Figure 15. Orbital debris visualizations give a sense of the vast quantity of objects that
form an external geotechnological layer circulating the earth. This refers to the layer of
living dead, obsolete technological objects in circulation in the geosynchronous region
(around 35,785 kilometers altitude). Image from NASA Orbital Debris Program Office.

Parikka.indd 130

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Fossil Futures  131

layer is as important a step in techniques of visualization as the surveys
that produced the flatness of the ground. Perhaps we could say that the
geological discoveries of the nineteenth century, not least Lyell’s Princi­
ples of Geology in the 1830s, prescribed the fantasy of the earth of deep
time and deep space, paralleled in the outer space that is seen as a sort of
geological frontier.59 In both cases, the military–­corporate enthusiasm was
the perfect engine for the aesthetic and epistemological mapping, demon­
strating again the medianatures double link: the media technologies giving us the real and imagined visions of the geophysical reality available
for mining are the ones of future technological fossils of debris and waste.
Media Temporealities: The Media-­Arche-­Fossil
This chapter has continued the earlier focus on temporality of the geology of media. The time of fossils is one of tear and wear, of decay and
rust, which characterize our notions of memory as much as they do the
physical temporality of materials. Indeed, the so-­called geological turn is
at least as much about time as it is about materiality of space. The different temporal scales of debris raise questions that are fundamental for any
analytic framework we use to make sense of the technologically stretched
as part of deep times, deep spaces. The slowness of the geological strata
and the earth’s different spheres are paralleled by the distances of asteroids’ travels. Even interstellar objects are able to enter the fantasy framework of contemporary capitalist mining as much as the underground
persists as the military–­corporate sector imagining not only a total reach
over human communications but a transparency of the earth itself with
new visualization and sonification techniques. The underground is of
importance because of its relation to the infrastructures that sustain the
operational readiness of any (military) organization on the ground. The
“underground . . . is the final frontier,” as the Geospatial corporation puts
it,60 offering a different emphasis on what Seymour argues is the final fron­
tier. Perhaps both are correct; perhaps it is more generally just the geological and the geophysical—­the abstract geology deterritorialized from
first nature—­that is the final frontier.
However, the seemingly spatial axis of the earth opens up also a temporal axis. Trevor Paglen’s interest is as much in the slowness of earth’s
duration as it is in our contribution to what will play out as (from our

Parikka.indd 131

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

132  Fossil Futures

human perspective) a slow impact over thousands of years: the climate
change, nuclear waste stored underground, and technological debris. But
slowness and acceleration become entangled in complex ways. For Paglen,
not just the surface of the planet but time itself is uneven. We reshape the
planet through temporal modification. Capital and military interests are
the prime movers, continues Paglen:
Mostly, we think about this in terms of speeding up time (increasing
capitalist turnover times, labor productivity, financial transactions
in the case of capital, and things like GPS targeting and hypersonic
cruise missiles in the case of militarism). But in addition to the
industrial annihilation of space with time that we see, the nineteenth
century and early twentieth century marks the advent of the so-­
called “Anthropocene Age,” a moment in earth’s history when
humans begin moving more sediment than traditional geomorphic
processes (erosion, glaciation, etc. . .). In the Anthropocene, things
like real-­estate markets become geomorphic agents, because fluctuations in housing prices, for example, determine how huge amounts
of sediment gets [sic] moved across the planet. My point is that
human societies are both speeding up and slowing down at the
same time. One consequence of these “anthropogeomorphic” processes is that the effects of our activities are played out over longer
and longer time periods: one example is climate change: we are
setting earth processes in motion that are going to play out over a
hundreds, of [sic] not thousands of years.61

Paglen’s ideas resonate with contemporary analyses of capitalism and
time and could be seen as a relevant comment on recent accelerationism discussions. They connect to psychogeography but entangle with
geophysics (see chapter 2): urban realities such as housing prices have an
effect where building materials, production, energy needs, get logistically
addressed.
The preceding quotation is also related to a media archaeology of
visualization technologies. After Galileo’s seventeenth-­century telescopic
opening of space around our globe, William Herschel’s astronomical
observations gave us a sense of geological deep times expanded into deep

Parikka.indd 132

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Fossil Futures  133

space in the nineteenth century. The longer histories of space as an object
constituted by visual technologies demonstrate what Paglen calls time’s
unevenness. Even Herschel’s telescope-­enhanced views to space framed
it in terms of time and as an emblem of the duration of the universe:
the millions of years of light traveling across space. “A telescope with the
power of penetrating into space has also, as it may be called, a power of
penetrating into time past.”62 The geological and astronomical interests
of knowledge and media of perception conjoin in John Durham Peters’s
apt term paleoscopes: telescopes gaze into space as well as time.
But media don’t just observe, they actively guide the way the world
spins. What Paglen emphasizes with the unevenness of time (as a produc­
tive force, even if not with necessarily positive outcomes when it comes
to the survival of a significant amount of the planet’s life) is that also
capitalism is able to accelerate such processes with its own logic, whether
abstract housing price fluctuations or the massive shifts of geological
material because of differing reasons tied to exchange value processes
that otherwise might hide the actual environmental–­ecological relations
involved in the process of abstraction.
The notion of fossil relates to contemporary discussions of the nonhuman in philosophy and the so-­called noncorrelationist philosophy. In
Quentin Meillassoux’s take, the notions of the “arche-­fossil” and the ancestral become mobilized as a philosophical thought-­experiment with
strong ontological impact. Turning toward the fossil is part of Meillassoux’s task of finding an alternative to the Kantian critical thought that is
interested in the correlated—­in other words, the world only as it is given
to us in the relation to our critical faculties of thought. The scientifically
proved and exactly dated existence of fossils that predate the human being
as a species is also a question of where the thinking of such things that
predate thinking stands. The arche-­fossil and fossil-­matter terms become
ways to indicate “the existence of an ancestral reality or event, one that
is anterior to terrestrial life.”63 Indeed, for Meillassoux, this notion refers
to the “material support on the basis of which the experiments that yield
estimates of ancestral phenomena proceed,”64 whether it is an isotope or
light emission from deep space. The arche-­fossil becomes a way to realize
the existence of a reality outside thought that does not indeed necessarily
correlate with what thought is: the faculties of the human. This existence

Parikka.indd 133

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

134  Fossil Futures

of a rift between the human and the nonhuman is an important influence on things that are not only manifested to us but “intrawordly occurrences,”65 to use Meillassoux’s term.
It’s, however, not a new discovery that the nonhuman exists and that
the flaws in so-­called correlationist thought need to be addressed. Already
the likes of Donna Haraway, Michel Serres, and the new materialists Rosi
Braidotti and Manuel Delanda have written about related things since the
1980s and 1990s. With Braidotti, this was also connected to arguments
in the emerging science and technology studies field as well as feminist
theory. In a way, the legacy of new materialism reminds that perhaps it is
not merely the human as “thinking being” we should be thinking about
but the various other modalities of which the human consists; the multiple temporalities that are being coordinated in ways that make time
uneven but constantly modified; the fossil as both a material support,
as Meillassoux argues, and a deeply challenging entity that is definitely
irreducible to how it manifests to us. And yet the ways in which we have
thought and acted in the world have had a definite impact on the future
fossils that are material supports for something else. The discussions of
fossils in this chapter, and in relation to the soil and dust earlier, remind
that such nonhuman things are compilations of heterogeneous transformations as part of temporally formed sediments. The soil is part of the
gradual formation of deeper layers of the planet.
The various ideas circulating around the concept of the Anthropocene
also in art practices, such as Chatonsky’s and Paglen’s, actually remind
that their view of media and technology acknowledges the human impact.
The human-­made becomes a manifestation of the infraworldly, irreducible to thinking. But the practices remain carefully aware of the multiple
scales that are constantly coordinated in this assembly. Hence the focus
on trash, media waste, and, in general, the industrial impact on the planet
is tightly related to the philosophical ideas concerning fossils as much as
they are to a necessity to account for the role of media and technology.
The significant political questions we are now facing must be somehow
temporally synchronized with the longer-­term durations to realize the
connections political economy and, for instance, exchange rela­tions, technological modes of production, and the immaterialization of labor have
with geophysical realities, fossil-­matter, and what I will call the media-­
arche-­fossils. This notion refers to the media technological stratum, which

Parikka.indd 134

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Fossil Futures  135

is irreducible to the human and yet partly supports and conditions it along­
side various aspects of the earth and its outer space geo­logical layers. It
refers back to the notion of medianatures I used earlier. In other words,
perhaps instead of dismissing relations and mediations, we need carefully
to refine what we mean by media and communication in the noncorrelationist as well as new materialist contexts of contemporary media culture.66
Notions of temporality must escape any human-­obsessed vocabulary and enter into a closer proximity with the fossil. The deep time even
in its historical form is a mode of scientific temporality that allows imagination of planetary time without humans. It presents epochs that stratify dynamics of the earth (see chapter 2) but also in later geological
research reminding that the periods are formed of dynamic, even catastrophic events: a punctuated equilibrium.
If history has been the discourse concerning narratives of men and
their lives, then fossils set the scene for a different challenge: a world
without humans, and narrativizing a future-­present in which media and
residues of waste might be the only monuments we left behind. In some
ways, this is acknowledged by Tim Morton: also on the level of design,
we must necessarily think of the other-­times than that of humans—­from
thousands to hundreds of thousands of years and, for instance, accounting for things such as “Plutonium 239, which remains dangerously radioactive for 24,100 years.”67
In the humanities and social sciences, we are engaging with this chal­
lenge, which comes under different names: the Anthropocene, the nonhuman, media materialism, the posthuman, and so forth. Discussions of
microtemporality (see chapter 1) are trying to present a technical media
temporality different to narrative writing of media history (from the human
perspective and for the humans68); discussions of archives are turning
toward the constitutive role of data centers as the infrastructural support
for memory;69 furthermore, data centers are themselves also geophysically determined organizations, reliant on energy and efficient cooling
systems. The geological is one way to account for the ecological relations
in how they address change across scales: the slow duration of deep times
but also the accelerated microtemporalities that govern the algorithmic
world of communication and trading reliant on as much as about the
planet and its resources. Acceleration, deceleration.

Parikka.indd 135

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

This page intentionally left blank

AFTERWORD
SO-­CALLED NATURE

Geology of media deals with the weird intersections of earth materials
and entangled times. It includes several events that reveal this combi­
nation of the planetary ancient and the technologically advanced. The
futuristic changes place with the obsolete in ways that are at times too
close to notice. The design culture of the new hides the archaic materials
of the planet.
The explosive event of industrialization was dependent on new forms
of energy; coal, oil, and gas became main drives replacing the reliance on
wind, water, plants, trees, and animals as energy sources.1 After dirty aesthetics of coal that painted the surface and the sky black, through other
fossil fuels we accessed the deep time of the earth: over three-­million-­
year-­old deposits of plants and animals from the predinosaur era; age-­old
photosynthesis that the planet stored to enable for instance capitalism to
expand in its current scientific technological form. The scientific studies
on deep time were paralleled with this practical tapping into the underground where mining engineers were discovering in the depths both coal
and valuable metals such as gold, silver, and copper.
Computers are a crystallization of past two hundred to three hundred years of scientific and technological development, geological insights,
and geophysical affordances. They are dependant on precious metals,
and even early-­nineteenth-­century networks needed copper for conduct­
ing the signal traffic of globalizing media culture. During the past decades,
optical fiber has made its entry as the glassy backbone of global infrastruc­
tures. Rare earth minerals already useful in earlier eras become essential
137

Parikka.indd 137

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

138  Afterword

in new technological contexts, when the computer turned visually attractive: graphical user interfaces, advanced screen technologies, and digital design culture geared for the consumer pleasure on massive scales, to
gather through interactive participation data on digital habits—­material
for the data-­mining industry.
The use of certain key minerals enables the miniaturization of the
computational worlds; they become mobile, ubiquitous, pervasive, and
embedded into the natural environment.2
The coal that fired first Western Europe then gradually other bits of
the world into industrialism is still very much present in the information
culture. “Dig more coal, the PCs are coming”3 alerted an article in Forbes
magazine, referring already in 1999 to the energy-­intensive processes of
computers. Increasing bandwidth, more efficient processors, data-­heavy
digital design practices, and the sheer increase in the number of com­
putational events tell the story of the upward curve in absolute numbers
of energy consumption of the supposedly immaterial matrix of compu­
tation. The microchipped world burns in intensity like millions of tiny
suns: “On its surface, where bits are incarnated as electrons, a chip runs
at enormously high power densities—­up to one-­tenth those at the surface of the sun.”4
In Roger Caillois’s little book on stones, he hints of a passage from
the earth to inscription: “Already present in the archives of geology, available for operations then inconceivable, was the model of what would
later be an alphabet.”5 In a later media technological perspective, we can
adjust this prophetic statement relating to the mystical “readability” of
the earth as a sign into something more technical: the archives of geology
give, not a model, but the material for what would later be media and
technology. Already Lyell and Darwin imagined the earth as a library and
a recording machine, continued in the elemental imagination of Charles
Babbage, who pitched even the “air as one vast library, on whose pages
are for ever written all that man has ever said or woman whispered.”6
The readability of the earth is still a continuing trope. The earth is
constantly read as if it were a script needing to be interpreted, a trace
of hermeneutics persistent in the age of advanced technology. Yet this
refers less to the long traditions of animistic nature and a world of meaning inside its seemingly silent bowels than to the military operations that

Afterword  139

constantly, to use Ryan Bishop’s words, “convert geography (geo-­graphy,
writing on the earth’s surface) into geology, a logos of the earth.”7 Besides
the military, there are different contexts, too—­including the arts. In their
piece Medium Earth,8 the Otolith Group speaks of the earthquake-­
sensitive group of people who channel the “subconscious” tremors of the
earth like the figure of a nineteenth medium who was channeling the
dead. “It listens to its deserts, translates the writing of its stones, and
deciphers the calligraphies of its expansion cracks.”9 This sort of mapping
the earth as our geophysical underground is one of sensitive bodies but
also the technical and audiovisual culture in which the earth is circuited
as part of mediatized expression.
To return to where we started: notions of materiality of media must
take into account this geophysical reality as both the source and the target of our technical media. Lewis Mumford spoke of paleotechnics but
restricted that to the earlier phase of industrialization, which was based
in mining. But mining and the appropriation of the geophysical have
never stopped: they are still part and parcel of the advanced media technological culture through which environmental sensing, smart dust, and
new protocols allow the world to be filled with IP addresses that map the
“natural” effectively as part of media.
This book is less a critique of theorists such as Friedrich Kittler or
others than it is a call for a further materialization of media not only as
media but as that bit which it consists of: the list of the geophysical elements that give us digital culture. It is not a world devoid of war, but in a
rather pessimistic way, we can say that the Cold War culture of surveillance, paranoia, and national and intra/extranational state interests is
only intensified with the scarcity of energy and material resources necessary to maintain those technological national regimes as economic and
security units. Media materiality is not contained in the machines, even
if the machines themselves contain a planet. The machines are more like
vectors across the geopolitics of labor, resources, planetary excavations,
energy production, natural pro­cesses from photosynthesis to mineralization, chemicals, and the after­effects of electronic waste. Where exactly in
this mix do you find the materiality of media? Kittler spoke about the
“so-­called Man” as a constructed object of media technological culture:
the human being made visible in the intersection of scientific mapping of

Parikka.indd 139

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

140  Afterword

its modes of sensation and the technological mobilization of its regimes
of sensation. The human being was understood as a second-­order creation wired into the circuit. Yet we need to extend and ask if it is as
important to map the existence of “so-­called Nature”:10 the existence of
the environmental as we see it through our technoscientific sensorium
and gradually disappearing from view, from existence, in the midst of the
Anthrobscene.

Parikka.indd 140

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

APPENDIX
ZOMBIE MEDIA
CIRCUIT BENDING
MEDIA ARCHAEOLOGY
INTO AN ART METHOD
Garnet Hertz and Jussi Parikka

“Zombie Media” was cowritten with the artist–­writer Garnet Hertz and
is added here as an appendix to the book. The text supplements several
of the themes discussed in the book and reaches out to the important
fields of critical design, do-­it-­yourself (DIY) culture, and discussions such
as (planned) obsolescence and electronic waste. We continue from Bruce
Sterling’s ideas of dead media and media paleontology but by claiming
that media do not die; media persists as electronic waste, toxic residue,
and its own sort of fossil layer of disused gadgets and electronics. The
text refers to the field of media archaeology as well. Media archaeology is
not the main focus of this book otherwise, despite references, for instance,
to Siegfried Zielinski’s use of the concept “deep time” and to the context
of media materialism of Friedrich Kittler. “Zombie Media” does, however,
express the link both to materiality of the residue and to some practice-­
theory developments as well.
Obsolescence Returns
In the United States, about 400 million units of consumer electronics are
discarded every year. Electronic waste, like obsolete cellular telephones,
141

Parikka.indd 141

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

142  Appendix

computers, monitors, and televisions, composes the fastest growing and
most toxic portion of waste in American society. As a result of rapid tech­
nological change, low initial cost, and planned obsolescence, the federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that two-­thirds of all
discarded consumer electronics still work—­approximately 250 million
functioning computers, televisions, VCRs, and cell phones are discarded
each year in the United States.1
Digital culture is embedded in a large pile of network wires, lines,
routers, switches, and other very material things that, as Jonathan Sterne
acutely and bluntly states, “will be trashed.”2 Far from being accidental,
discarding and obsolescence are in fact internal to contemporary media
technologies. As Sterne argues, the logic of new media does not only
mean the replacement of old media by new media but that digital culture
is loaded with the assumption and expectation of a short-­term forthcoming obsolescence. There is always a better laptop or mobile phone on the
horizon: new media always become old.
This text is an investigation into planned obsolescence, media culture, and temporalities of media objects; we approach this under the
umbrella of media archaeology and aim to extend the media archaeological interest of knowledge into an art methodology, following the work of
scholars such as Erkki Huhtamo3 and others who have given the impetus
to think about the complex materiality of media as technology—­from
Friedrich Kittler to Wolfgang Ernst and Sean Cubitt. Hence media archae­
ology not only becomes a method for excavation of the repressed, the
forgotten, or the past but extends itself into an artistic method close to
DIY culture, circuit bending, hardware hacking, and other exercises that
intervene the political economy of information technology. Media in their
various layers embody memory: not only human memory but the memory of things, of objects, of chemicals, and of circuits.
Planned Obsolescence
Planned obsolescence is a concept first put forward by Bernard London
in 1932, as a proposed solution to the Great Depression. In London’s
mind, the economic downturn was prolonged by consumers who continued to use and reuse devices long after they were purchased. His proposal outlined that every product should be labeled with an expiration

Parikka.indd 142

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

Appendix  143

date and that the government should charge tax on products that were
used past their determined life-­span: “I propose that when a person continues to posses and use old clothing, automobiles and buildings, after
they have passed their obsolescence date, as determined at the time
they were created, he should be taxed for such continued use of what is
legally ‘dead.’ ”4
Although London’s proposal was never implemented as a government initiative, the planning of obsolescence was adopted by product
designers and commercial industry: artificially decreasing the life-­span of
consumer commodities—­like new fashions that make old clothing appear
outdated—­increasing the speed of obsolescence, and stimulating the need
to purchase. Industrial designers like Brooks Stevens popularized the
dynamic of planned obsolescence in 1954 as instilling a “desire to own
something a little newer, a little better, a little sooner than is necessary.”5
Retailing experts like Victor Lebow further clarified this mandate in 1955:
“These commodities and services must be offered to the consumer with
a special urgency. We require not only ‘forced draft’ consumption, but
‘expensive’ consumption as well. We need things consumed, burned up,
worn out, replaced, and discarded at an ever increasing pace.”6
In reference to contemporary consumer products, planned obsolescence takes many forms. It is not only an ideology, or a discourse; more
accurately, it takes place on a micropolitical level of design: difficult-­to-­
replace batteries in personal MP3 audio players, proprietary cables and
chargers that are only manufactured for a short period of time, discontinued customer support, or plastic enclosures that are glued shut and break
if opened.7 In other words, the technological objects are designed as a
“black box”8 that is engineered not to be fixed and has no user-­serviceable
parts inside.
Repurposing Obsolescence in Contemporary Art
Despite a planned obsolescence, the probing, exploring, and manipulating of consumer electronics outside of their standard life-­span is a key
tactic in contemporary art practice. Reuse of consumer commodities
emerges within various art methods of the early avant-­garde in the early
twentieth century, from Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque’s work with
found newspapers in 1912 to Marcel Duchamp’s Bicycle Wheel of 1913 or

Parikka.indd 143

28/01/2015 12:46:23 PM

144  Appendix

his inverted Bedfordshire urinal “fountain” of 1917. Such practices have
been widely addressed in media art historical writing already.9 The mass
production of commodities has shifted significantly in the century since
Braque, Picasso, and Duchamp’s readymade work in the 1910s: since a
significant “readymade” portion of commodities in American society is
electronic, artists have moved to working with and exploring electronics,
computers, televisions, and household gadgets. Early artistic repurposers
of consumer electronics include Nam June Paik, who worked with electrically rewiring televisions as early as 1963 to display abstract, minimalist
shapes. Although many artists using electronics have focused on exploring the potentials of new media forms, others have approached using
electronic commodities in the spirit of assemblage, bricolage, readymade,
or collage: as an everyday and standing reserve, or bestand, of available
raw materials.10 Instead of using electronics to explore or develop cutting-­
edge technologies, this approach uses “trailing-­edge” everyday and obsolete technologies as its key resource.
Bending Circuits: The Incantor
Reed Ghazala, a Cincinnati-­based American artist born in the 1950s, is
a pivotal figure in the development of what is termed “circuit bending”:
the creative short-­circuiting of consumer electronics primarily for the
purpose of generating novel sound or visual output.11  The technique of
circuit bending takes found objects like battery-­powered children’s toys
and inexpensive synthesizers and modifies them into DIY musical instruments and homemade audio generators.
Likely the most recognizable example of circuit bending is Ghazala’s
Incantor series of devices, highly customized Speak & Spell, Speak &
Read, and Speak & Math children’s toys that he has built since 1978. The
methodology of bending the toy involves dismantling the electronic
device and adding components like switches, knobs, and sensors to allow
the circuit to be altered and shifted by the user. Ghazala’s Incantor devices
completely reconfigure the synthesized human voice circuitry within the
toy to spew out a noisy, glitchy tangle of sound that stutters, loops, screams,
and beats.
The process of circuit bending typically involves going to a secondhand store or garage sale to obtain an inexpensive battery-­powered device,

Parikka.indd 144

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

Appendix  145

taking the back cover of the device off, and probing the mechanism’s
circuit board. Any two points on the circuit board are connected by using
a “jumper” wire that temporarily short-­circuits and rewires the device.
The battery-­powered device is powered on during this process, and the
speaker of the system is listened to for unusual sound effects that result
from probing. If an interesting result is found, the connections are marked
for modification, and switches, buttons, or other devices can be inserted
between these points to enable or disable the effect.
Circuit Bending Formerly New Media
Circuit bending is an electronic DIY movement focused on manipulating
circuits and changing the taken-­for-­granted function of the technology
without formal training or approval. This approach is characteristic of
post–­World War II electronic culture, especially post-­1970s electronic
amateurism, hobbyism, or DIY tinkering that was typified in organizations like the Homebrew Computer Club.12 In Certeau’s terms, “these
‘ways of operating’ constitute the innumerable practices by means of
which users reappropriate the space organized by techniques of sociocultural production.”13 Circuit bending is a way of operating that reminds
us that users consistently reappropriate, customize, and manipulate consumer products in unexpected ways, even when the inner workings of
devices are intentionally engineered as an expert territory. Ghazala’s
Incantor is useful as a tool to remind us of sociotechnical issues in contemporary society, including planned obsolescence, the black boxing of
technology, and the interior accessibility of everyday consumer products.
As a way of operating, circuit bending is an aspect of digital culture
that does not easily fit under the term new media—­the customized, trashy,
and folksy methodologies of circuit bending recall historical practices of
reuse and serve as a useful counterpoint to envisioning digital culture
only in terms of a glossy, high-­tech “Californian Ideology.”14 We find
Ghazala’s explorations similar in spirit to media archaeology and propose
a stronger articulation of media archaeology as an art methodology—­and
furthermore not only an art methodology that addresses the past but one
that expands into a wider set of questions concerning dead media, or
what we shall call zombie media: the living dead of media history,15 and
the living dead of discarded waste that is not only of inspirational value

Parikka.indd 145

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

146  Appendix

to artists but signals death in the concrete sense of the real death of
nature through its toxic chemicals and heavy metals. In short, what gets
bent is not only the false image of linear history but the circuits and
archive that form the contemporary media landscape. For us, media is
approached through the concrete artifacts, design solutions, and various
technological layers that range from hardware to software processes,
each of which in its own way participates in the circulation of time and
memory. The medium is an archive in the Foucauldian sense as a con­
dition of knowledge, but also as a condition of perceptions, sensations,
memory, and time. In this text, a special emphasis is placed on hardware
even if we do not wish to claim that it is the only aspect about media and
obsolescence we should consider.
Media Archaeology as Bending Circuitry
The political economy of consumer capitalism is a media archaeological
problem as well. Media archaeology has been successful in setting itself
as a methodology of lost ideas, unusual machines, and reemerging desires
and discourses searching for elements of difference in relation to mainstream technological excitement and hype, but not always connecting
such ideas to political economy or ecology.
With wide implications for the media archaeological methodology,
the archive is increasingly being rethought not as a spatial place of history but as a contemporary technological circuit that redistributes temporality. This is how Wolfgang Ernst suggests that theorists and artists
rethink media archaeology, not only as an excavation of the past, but as
an intensive gaze on the microtemporal modulations that take place in
computerized circuits of technology.16 This alternative sense of technological temporality is closer to engineering diagrams and circuits than the
historian’s hermeneutic interpretation of documents. Drawing directly
from Foucault, media archaeology is for Ernst monumental, not nar­ra­
tive; it is keen on excavating solely on the basis that something exists, and
its object-­oriented mode of media materialism is happy to proceed on the
basis of an existence of a circuit. Hence Ernst is not interested in alternative media histories in a similar way as, for example, Huhtamo or Siegfried Zielinski, or even in imaginary media that challenges mainstream
discourses of media technology,17 but in concrete devices through which

Parikka.indd 146

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

Appendix  147

we can understand the nature of temporality in contemporary elec­tronic
and digital culture. For Ernst, just like for so many media archaeological
artists, such as DeMarinis, Gebhard Sengmüller, or a more recent wave
of young artists such as the Institute for Algorhythmics, interested in
concrete sonic archaeologies of contemporary media, media archaeology
starts from the media assemblage—­a concrete device that is operational.
Circuits are what define modernity and our IT-­oriented condition.
Circuits inside radios, computers, televisions, are only one face of circuitry. The circuits that can be opened up from their plastic enclosures
are only relays to wider, more abstract circuits in terms of cables and
lines, of electromagnetic radiation and wireless transmission. The air is
heavy with “disembodied” information technology, and culture is permeated with circuits of political economy. Hence it would be an important
project to write a media archaeology of circuits. The circuit, not the past,
is where media archaeology starts if we want to develop a more concrete
design-­oriented version of how we can think about recycling and remediating18 as art methods.
Yet there is a special challenge for work that takes as its object a
concrete opening up of technologies. The inner workings of consumer
electronics and information technologies are increasingly concealed as
a result of the development of newer generations of technologies, a feature that is characteristic of recent decades of technological culture. So
what does a media archaeology of consumer objects look like when we
do not go back in time to media history but rather inside a device?
Once developed and deployed widely, technical components are
under­stood by users as objects that serve a particular function: an electronic toy makes a sound when a button is pressed, a telephone makes
a telephone call, and a computer printer outputs a document when requested. The inner workings of the device are unknown to the user, with
the circuitry of the device like a mysterious “black box” that is largely
irrelevant to using it. It is only an object with a particular input that results
in a specific output; its mechanism is invisible.  From a design perspective,
the technology is intentionally created to render the mechanism invisible
and usable as a single punctualized object.
Punctualization refers to a concept in actor-­network theory to describe
when components are brought together into a single complex system that

Parikka.indd 147

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

148  Appendix

can be used as a single object. We refer to the disassembly of these single
objects as “depunctualization”—­which shows a circuit of dependencies
that ties the owner to the corporation that manufactured the device19
(see Figure 16).
Black boxing, or the development of technological objects to a point
where they are simply used and not understood as technical objects, is a
requirement of infrastructure and technological development.  A computer system, for example, is almost incomprehensible if thought of in
terms of its millions of transistors, circuits, mathematical calculations,
and technical components. Black boxes are the punctualized building
blocks from which new technologies and infrastructures are built.20
A black box, however, is a system that is not technically understood or
accessed, and as a result, these technologies are often completely unusable

Figure 16. A black-­boxed system processes input into output without the user’s knowledge
of the interior functionality of the system. When a black-­boxed system is broken, output
stops. At this point, the black box becomes depunctualized. The interior of a black-­boxed
system is expert territory and tends not to be user serviceable. Despite being expert
territory, portions of the non-­user-­serviceable interior of the black box system can be
manipulated and bent by nonexperts. We propose that both computer hardware and
historical archives can be bent. Image by Garnet Hertz.

Parikka.indd 148

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

Appendix  149

when they become obsolete or broken.  Once the input–­output or desired
functionality of the device stops working, it is often unfixable and inaccessible for modification for most individuals. Unlike a household lamp,
which can be fitted with replacement lightbulbs, many consumer electronic devices have no user-­serviceable parts, and the technology is discarded after it breaks. The depunctualization, or breaking apart the
device into its components, is difficult because of the highly specialized
engineering and manufacturing processes used in the design of the artifact: contemporary electronic devices are intentionally built to be discarded, and their obsolescence is clearly planned.
Within the framework of media archaeology, it is important to note
that there is not only one box. Instead, one box hides a multitude of other
black boxes that have been working in interaction, in various roles, in
differing durations. As Bruno Latour notes, its often when things break
down that a seemingly inert system opens up to reveal that objects contain more objects, and actually those numerous objects are composed of
relations, histories, and contingencies. 
Consider Latour’s methodological exercise as an art methodology
for media archaeology:
Look around the room. . . . Consider how many black boxes there
are in the room. Open the black boxes; examine the assemblies
inside. Each of the parts inside the black box is itself a black box full
of parts. If any part were to break, how many humans would immediately materialize around each. How far back in time, away in space,
should we retrace our steps to follow all those silent entities that
contribute peacefully to your reading this chapter at your desk?
Return each of these entities to step 1; imagine the time when each
was disinterested and going its own way, without being bent, enrolled, enlisted, mobilized, folded in any of the others’ plots. From
which forest should we take our wood. In which quarry should we
let the stones quietly rest.21

For the arts, objects are never inert but consist of various temporalities, relations, and potentials that can be brought together and broken
apart. Things break apart every day anyhow—­especially high technology—­
and end up as seemingly inert objects, dead media, discarded technology.

Parikka.indd 149

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

150  Appendix

Yet dead media creep back as dangerous toxins into the soil, or then as
zombie media recycled into new assemblies. According to Ernst, media
archaeology is less “about dead media, but on media undead. There is an
untimeliness of media which is incorporated here.”22 Hence there is a distinct difference to the dead media project of Bruce Sterling that in a different kind of way addressed media forgotten and obsolescent. Zombie
media is interested in media not only out of use but resurrected to new
uses, contexts, and adaptations.
Archivist / Circuit Bender
For the figure of the artist, technical media has meant nods both toward
engineering and the archive, as Huhtamo has noted: “the role of the artist-­
engineer, which rose into prominence in the 1960s (although its two sides
rarely met in one person), has at least partly been supplanted by that of
the artist-­archaeologist.”23 Yet methodologies of reuse, hardware hacking,
and circuit bending are becoming increasingly central in this context as
well. Bending or repurposing the archive of media history strongly relates
to the pioneering works of artists such as Paul DeMarinis, Zoe Beloff, or
Gebhard Sengmüller—­where a variety of old media technologies have
been modified and repurposed to create pseudo-­historical objects from
a speculative future.
Referring to DeMarinis’s various sound-­based projects, such as The
Edison Effect (1989–­93) and Gray Matter (1995), Huhtamo has suggested
that the notion of the artist-­archaeologist can be thought of as a t(h)ink­
erer.24 In the age of consumer electronics, the artist can also be thought
of as an archaeological circuit bender and hacker, which links media
archaeology with the political agenda of contemporary media production. The black boxes of the historical archive and consumer electronics
are cracked open, bent, and modified.
Media Archaeological Time: Time of the Living Dead
We want to bring these various components now together: planned obso­
lescence, the material nature of information, and electronic waste. Planned
obsolescence was introduced as the logic of consumer technology cycles,
which is embedded in a culture of material information technologies that
in themselves should be increasingly understood through chemicals, toxic

Parikka.indd 150

28/01/2015 12:46:24 PM

Appendix  151

components, and the residue they leave behind after their media function has been so to speak “consumed.” The realization that information
technology is never ephemeral and therefore can never completely die
has both ecological and media archaeological importance. As a material
assemblage, information technology also has its duration that is not restricted to its human-­centered use value: media cultural objects and infor­
mation technology have an intimate connection with the soil, the air, and
nature as a concrete, temporal reality. Just like nature affords the building
of information technology—­how, for example, gutta-­percha was an essen­
tial substance for insulating nineteenth-­century telegraphic lines or how
columbite tantalite is an essential mineral for a range of contemporary
high-­tech devices—­those devices return to nature.25
In short, information technology involves multiple ecologies that
travel across political economy and natural ecology.26 This Guattarian
take on media ecology is connected to an ecosophical stance: an awareness of overlapping ecologies feeding into interrelations between the
social, mental, somatic, nonorganic, and animal. Indeed, following Sean
Cubitt’s lead, we argue that archaeologies of screen and information technology media should increasingly not look only at the past but inside the
screen to reveal a whole different take on future-­oriented avant-­garde:
“The digital realm is an avant-­garde to the extent that it is driven by perpetual innovation and perpetual destruction. The built-­in obsolescence
of digital culture, the endless trashing of last year’s model, the spendthrift
throwing away of batteries and mobile phones and monitors and mice . . .
and all the heavy metals, all the toxins, sent off to some god-­forsaken
Chinese recycling village . . . that is the digital avant-­garde.”27 Our proposed alternative archaeology of tinkering, remixing, and collage would
not start from Duchamp and others but from opening up the technological gadget, the screen, and the system.
Media archaeological methods have carved out complex, overlapping, multiscalar temporalities of the human world in terms of media
cultural histories, but in the midst of an ecological crisis, a more thorough nonhuman view is needed. In this context, bending media archaeology into an artistic methodology can be seen as a way to tap into the
ecosophic potential of such practices as circuit bending, hardware hacking, and other ways of reusing and reintroducing dead media into a new
