Early China Coast Meteorology
The Role of Hong Kong


Preface

By the middle of the nineteenth century meteorology had become a frontier
science, but, unlike most frontier sciences, a most valuable one in practical
terms. It was a science that should easily have translated to East Asia, where
its benefits were transparently obvious. The Japanese, when they set about it,
rapidly adapted to the paradigm; the Chinese, fearful of colonial encroachment,
were decidedly cool on the subject. What is surprising is how sluggish the
development of the subject in the colonial environments was. What were the
reasons for this? The present work grew out of an effort to document the history
of the physical sciences in Hong Kong. This turned out to be too daunting a
task, but from it grew an acquaintance with the unheralded founding director
of the Hong Kong Observatory, Dr. William Doberck, a subject who provides a
central focus for an account which can make a small contribution to answering
this question. I also try to give a more general description of meteorology in the
region during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, something that
has not received much attention from historians to date. Incidental to the whole
story is an account of colonial government and society in Hong Kong from a
point of view which is complimentary to the more usual politically oriented
studies. But the work is more a portrait of events than a researched thesis. No
effort has been made to consult Japanese sources, or to track down records from
the Manila (largely lost) or Zikawei observatories, and even the records from
the Hong Kong Observatory, if we exclude the Government Gazette, are by no
means complete. So reliance has often had to be placed on secondary sources,
mostly Colonial Office files and contemporary newspaper reports. Not all of the
material here is of wide provenance, and I thought it wise to add information to
augment some of these sources. My preference for doing so would be signalled
footnotes on the page — footnotes being often of greater interest than the text.
I’m conscious, however, that many readers find such footnotes distracting so
have relegated all such material to the end of the book.
	

Preface

	
Minutes from the Colonial Office are from files CO129/297 (1882) through
CO129/442 (1917). Materials from the Hong Kong Public Records Office
are in files HKRS356 and HKRS842. Different spellings in early documents,
Hongkong, Hong-Kong, Kaulung etc. are all standardized throughout to
‘Hong Kong’, etc.
	
A bibliography lists all books cited, as well as journal articles that are
referred to in the text more than once, and details of other publications are
found in the notes where they are mentioned. In the last days of manuscript
preparation I became aware of an unfinished draft of a book, An Introduction
to Typhoons, that a late director of the Hong Kong Observatory, Gordon J. Bell,
planned to produce, and which is housed in the Observatory library. Some
relevant historical material, as well as some material, earlier familiarity with
which would have saved me considerable effort, is to be found there.
	
There is a perennial problem of how names of places are to be treated,
the variability over time being especially acute in that part of the world. Some
accommodation must be found for the form as written at the time and for
contemporary versions. Common geographical names, such as Peking, Canton,
Hong Kong and Macao which have been anglicized in the same way as have
Lisbon, Rome, Dublin and Copenhagen are retained in their familiar English
form. More difficult to deal with are the names of other places, especially in
China, where forms of a more transitory or corrupted nature were in common
use. To make a blanket replacement of Chinese place names by their current
Hanyu Pinyin forms, e.g. Yantai for Chefoo, or Nanpengdao for Lamocks,
would make for a very perplexed reading of the historical material. For the sake
of cross referencing and readability, names are given as in the context where
they arise, and the accepted contemporary versions are given in a Gazetteer in
an Appendix — in Pinyin transliteration in the case of places in China. In the
same interest of readability, text in other than roman script is relegated to the
endnotes. The Jesuit observatory at Xujiahui is referred to throughout, except
in quotations, as Zikawei, in keeping with the priests’ usage.

MacKeown_00_fm_rev.indd 14

02/12/2010 11:55 AM

1
Nineteenth-Century Observatories
Meteorology will not be in working order for
two years more: but ‘Hart’ is long, if time is
fleeting.
Robert Hart, December 18731

Introduction
The scientific approach to the physical world which blossomed in Europe from
the time of Newton and his contemporaries onwards only slowly diffused to
more distant regions, and that encroachment was largely under the cloak of
European colonial expansion. The extension of the community of science can
hardly be described as a missionary undertaking. The propagation of the ways
of thinking of scientists did not preoccupy them in the way that the saving
of souls moved religiously minded individuals. Of course, we are not talking
of mutually exclusive classes. The role of science was pressed into service in
the cause of evangelization on many fronts. Ironically, the successes of these
endeavours, as we will see, were particularly favourable to the propagation of
scientific thinking, more so than to the conversion of the heathen. The ground
for foreign encroachment on traditional patterns of thought was fertile in some
places more than others. The bulk of Asia — India, China, Japan — was heir to
rich educational traditions that could easily sympathize with the new ways of
thinking. We are concerned in this volume with a part of the world, the South
China Sea and its littoral, and the subject of meteorology, a subject paradigmatic
of the scientific approach to nature, emphasizing systematic observation and
rigorous analysis in the solution of problems.



2	

Early China Coast Meteorology

	
Meteorology as a subject was of as much interest 150 years ago as it is
today, in the early twenty-first century. The scenario to which it relates, of
course, has changed immeasurably over the intervening years, but the urgency
of its practice was no less attended to then than it is these days. However, the
perceived pedestrian nature of its study seems to have eclipsed its role in most
chronicles of the times. The story of the military and political endeavours in
the advancement of imperial designs by Europeans in other parts of the world
in the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries has had many tellings. So also have
there been many reports on the lives and adventures of the individuals who
took part. Botanical and zoological enquiries among colonial servants, as
well as casual travellers, have had wide reporting, but it is only recently that
medicine, and to a much lesser extent the physical sciences and engineering,
have drawn some attention.2 We are concerned with a factual account of the
small, specialized subject of meteorology and especially how it was practised on
the ‘China Coast’. Astronomy, and geomagnetism, bedmates of the subject in the
early scientific age, will naturally also attract some attention. Although it is not
our primary purpose, the story related also throws light on the strengths, foibles
and prejudices of colonial society, as well as its attitudes to and interactions,
in many cases minimal, with the native populations. There is much more to
the story of meteorology in the Orient than an account of the role of the Hong
Kong Observatory and we will make some attempt to cover these other aspects,
but our focus will be on the evolution of the Observatory in Hong Kong and
its relations with other Asian observatories. For good or bad, the history of the
first thirty years of that observatory is in great part a chronicle of the career of
Dr. William Doberck, the Observatory’s founding director and the institution’s
feisty leader for twenty-four of those thirty years. His near quarter-century stay
there and the shadow he cast for a further six years in the person of his close
colleague and successor, Frederic George Figg, who retired in 1912, form a
definitive timeframe for the study in hand. Doberck’s fame as an astronomer is
also an excuse to treat, briefly, the early history of astronomy in Hong Kong. Its
later developments are described elsewhere.3
	
To some, the very identification of meteorology in the East with its
manifestations in Hong Kong will appear offensive. Compared to the
contributions made by the observatories in China, Japan and the Philippines,
Hong Kong will often appear, at least in the sense of resources, to have been
a minor, but also a fractious player in the meteorology of the region in those
times. We choose 1912 as the year at which to take stock of the development of
observatories in East Asia, largely because it marks a watershed in the history
of the Observatory in Hong Kong. The thirtieth year of its existence was the
year in which the last of the cohort of early officers retired, the time when any
pretence at playing a role in astronomy was discarded and a management more


	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

3

attuned to the modern demands of meteorology took charge. It was also the
year in which, in a formal sense, it turned over a new leaf when ‘Royal’ was
added to its title.4 The same year saw the new Republican government in China
introducing not one but two meteorological institutes, one associated with the
ministry of agriculture and the other with the ministry of education. But before
getting to the core of the story it is informative to look briefly at the geopolitical
context in which the Hong Kong Observatory originated and the history of
other colonial observatories predating its founding.

Early Systematic Observations
The weather in all cultures has always been a matter of comment and concern and
accounts of it have survived in many places, not least in the exhaustive records of
natural phenomena to be found in Chinese documents, official and private. The
earliest quantitative measurements made were of rainfall in China and Korea.5
Descriptions relevant to our story were also given by early Portuguese explorers
at Macao and Canton, and by Dutch traders in Japan. Such records are valuable
for studies of climatology and how the climate may have varied over time but,
being largely non-quantitative, they have little to contribute to a history of
meteorology as such. Before a review of systematic studies of the subject and
a description of the main sources of early meteorological work in East Asia —
the various observatories established there from the mid-nineteenth century
onwards — we will record a few isolated instances of systematic recordings
made by individuals, some dating as far back as the seventeenth century.
	
There is the example of an Irish sojourner at Xiamen, by the name of James
Cunningham, who in 1699 published an account of measurements he made
there on the pressure, the wind direction and the state of the weather from
October 1698 to the following January.6 Mr. Cunningham, later a fellow of the
Royal Society, was for a time a physician to the English traders on Zhoushan
(Chusan) Island, nine kilometres off the coast in Hangzhou Bay. Another notable
example of early meteorological monitoring comes from Sweden. From the
1730s the Swedish Academy of Sciences had an arrangement with the Swedish
East India Company (a rather enlightened body of men) to carry scientists on
board their China-bound ships.7 At least one meteorological record from this
enterprise survives: a near complete tabulation by an anonymous visitor of the
rainfall at Macao from early March to 12 September 1780.8 Another interesting
case is that of a private observatory that was established at Batavia, in the Dutch
East Indies, as early as 1765. Its owner was the self-taught German-Dutch
Reverend Johan Maurits Mohr, whose wife fell into a large inheritance. This
enabled him to build and equip his own private observatory from where he made



4	

Early China Coast Meteorology

various meteorological and astronomical observations, including two Transits
of Venus. A nucleus of amateur scientists built up around his observatory, but
by 1790 activity had declined, not to recover again for almost a century.9

China: The Early Days
Records of the weather, as is the case with all observations of nature, have a
long history in China. However, in her history of the Hong Kong Observatory,
Ho Pui-yin remarks on the failure to keep continuous records of meteorological
phenomena, the observers in general only recording exceptional events, and she
describes records of many such events, especially typhoons, in the weather in
Southern China from pre-Observatory days.10 So, unlike astronomy, meteorology
in China in the pre-scientific age never reached any level of sophistication. In
the words of China’s most distinguished meteorological son, Zhu Kezhen,11
it never advanced beyond the stage of prognostication by proverbs, of which
many exist. Typical is:
If on the first come wind and rain,
’Twill bring us pestilence and pain;
If at Ch’ing Ming a south wind come,
It means a plenteous harvest-home.12

Nevertheless, although extensive records exist which would be valuable
to students of climate for inferring climate and climate change in China, it
would be stretching a point to suggest they played any determining role in the
development of modern meteorology.
	
From the earliest days of their participation in the working of the Peking
Observatory, and the time of Ferdinand Verbiest in the mid-seventeenth
century, the Jesuit priests attached to that Observatory included meteorological
monitoring among the curriculum of new knowledge they introduced into the
Celestial Kingdom. We have some records of the first half of the eighteenth
century from the French Jesuits there in the form of data they forwarded to the
French Academy in Paris. Extensive data on temperature and wind direction,
measured at 06:30 and 15:30 daily from July 1743 until March 1746 at the
Observatory, communicated by a Fr. Antoine Gaubil, have been reported.13 The
French had a reputation for rigour in their instrumentation — a resolution
in their temperature measurements of 0.31°C at that time has been deduced14
— and the systematic manner in which the data were accumulated must lend
much confidence in their reliability. These data are particularly interesting for
establishing, in the summer of 1743, a recorded all time high of 44.4°C in the



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

5

capital, and a heat wave in North China in which Fr. Gaubil reports 11 400
deaths around the capital; this heat wave is amply confirmed by many qualitative
reports of the time in official documents and provincial chronicles. It has been
concluded that it was the highest temperature encountered at Peking in the
last seven hundred years. But there is more to meteorology than temperature
records. Other observations on the pressure, the wind direction and the state
of the weather, made twice daily at Peking from 1757 to 1762 were reported by
another Jesuit father, Jean-Joseph Amiot.15

An Early Publication in Chinese
There are different readings of the confrontation in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries between Western science as prosecuted by the colonial
powers and indigenous populations in the territories they bestrode, either as
colonial mandarins, philanthropists or missionaries. The case of meteorology
might seem to be fairly simple compared, say, with the complexity of the
encounter of Western medicine with native populations. Meteorology would
largely be in the service of the foreigners, the benefit to the locals only incidental
to this role. Yet the earliest systematic introduction of the subject to the China
Coast, the publication of a book in Chinese on the subject in the 1850s
by a foreign missionary, was exclusively directed at native readership. The
subsequent establishment by the Jesuits of major meteorological observatories
in China and the Philippines also cannot be easily read as the deliberate
prosecution of colonial-oriented goals, even if they would eventually be coopted into that exercise.
	
The book in question was published in 1853 by the American missionary
doctor Daniel Jerome MacGowan at Ningbo.16 MacGowan himself did not claim
to make any meteorological measurements, but he was an active participant in a
programme of bringing Western scientific thought to the attention of educated
Chinese, with the twin aims of rejuvenating their society and spreading the
Christian message.17 Two years earlier at Ningbo he had published Bo Wu Tong
Shu or the Philosophical Almanac, a text introducing electricity to local readers
in the context of explaining the electric telegraph. It contained illustrations
featuring such items as Leyden jars and Toepler-Holtz machines, and proposed
a never-to-be-adopted code of eighteen Chinese symbols to be used on the
telegraph keyboard. That book was eventually translated into Japanese and its
terminology played a role in decisions made there between Dutch-based and
Chinese-based nomenclature in physics. The book by MacGowan of interest
to us is titled Hang hai jin zhen (the Navigator’s Golden Needle, see Fig. 1) and
separately in English, The Law of Storms in Chinese. It consists of thirty-seven



6	

Early China Coast Meteorology

pages and is a singular publication on meteorology at the time. It contains a
brief introduction in English, in which the author tells us that the chapter on
typhoons in the South China Sea in Col. Reid’s work forms the basis for his
publication, but that works by Redfield and Piddington were also consulted.18
He acknowledges financial assistance from J. C. Bowring at Hong Kong in
publishing his pamphlet. He continues: ‘So much of the science of meteorology
as applies to the subject has been introduced, with some general principles of
navigation as practiced in the West; the whole being interspersed with remarks
on natural and revealed religion’. He castigated the Chinese for their slowness
to appreciate new discoveries, but hoped that his pamphlet would help Chinese
navigators to escape the fury of the storms and lead them to ‘make observations
calculated to perfect our acquaintance with the tracks of revolving storms, in
regions rarely visited by foreign ships’. He wrote further:
they need instruction in those sciences which are the source of so much
of the wealth and power of our native lands, and without which the
resources of the empire can never be fully developed. In supplying
them with works of a scientific character, we shall not only promote
their material interests, but by employing these as media for conveying
religious truth, we shall contribute largely to their intellectual and moral
regeneration.


	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

7

	
MacGowan translated the booklet into Chinese, he said, with supplements
of his own ideas, so that mariners would know how to avoid hurricanes and
master the principles of navigation. In this he is being modest. The work is not
at all a literal translation of Reid’s chapter. Not only does he add a discussion
of basic meteorological principles like atmospheric pressure and the role of the
earth’s rotation in wind patterns, and adapt the material to the region of the
South China Sea, but his discussions of phenomena are much more user-friendly
than the sometimes rambling account in Reid. Although his main intention was
to advise sailors on the avoidance of harm when encountering a typhoon, in a
final chapter he introduces the principles and methods of navigation, especially
the determination of position. Explaining the arbitrariness in assigning a zero of
longitude, he chose the capital, Peking, as his zero reference in the one labelled
chart he presented.19 He also explains the origins of the tides, contrasting the
moon/sun role in the phenomenon with the role of a large fish in a hole in the
sea believed by some, he said, to be the explanation. He admitted to ignorance
of the names of some islands along the coast and of conditions in the seas north
of Taiwan, and invited his Chinese sailor readers to help him. They should fill
in the names of the unknown islands and if they encountered typhoons they
should record the time, location and the change of the direction of the wind in a
timely and continuous fashion, and send their records to the consuls of Western
countries. When he had the results he promised he would write another book.
He included a chart of typical typhoon tracks in the region, but in the absence
of any land-based observatories in that part of the world at the time all such
compilations were based on the reports in ships’ logs, and it is not too surprising
that the chart shows some deficiencies when compared with later summaries.
We will return to this issue in chapter 6.
	
The theological interventions threatened in the introduction are tolerably
few. In defence of the scientific method he wrote how as a king administers his
kingdom according to laws, so God administers the universe according to laws,
too, and that the wind was to be understood as one of God’s laws — a contrast
he wished to make against prevailing yin-yang theories. More evangelical was
his advice on personal behaviour on encountering a storm, and being in a
position where the ship is nearly destroyed. The mariner should keep a cool
head, not panic nor lose his wits and abandon steering. He should not prostrate
himself before idols on board and so lose his own judgment. Instead, he should
worship with his heart the only true God in heaven, and his son Jesus Christ.
Only this God was effective. How could idols made from wood and earth save
him? He closed his pamphlet on a moralizing tone, explaining how he had
come from afar, not in search of profit or rank but to awaken common people to
the truth, and how proper conduct in society, not focussing on profit and greed,
was ultimately of greater importance than the avoidance of typhoons. Although


8	

Early China Coast Meteorology

of considerable interest to us here, it is questionable whether MacGowan’s book
had any significant influence in the country at the time. Did any sailors take
up his advice to abandon idols, or his request to forward information to the
foreign consuls? It seems unlikely; no second book emerged and no later writers
on meteorology in China makes any mention of the one he did write. As we
have seen, the book was an early indicator of efforts of foreigners and Chinese
together to bring modern developments in mathematics and the sciences to the
attention of the citizens of the Empire, but it was to be the only one centred on
meteorology.20 We will encounter no later instances where colonial officials or
missionary priests attempted to assimilate native potential in the advancement
of the subject, but more usually an opinion on their part dismissive of the ability
of local employees for such work.

China: Systematic Recording Pre-1860
The earlier meteorological activity of the Jesuits in the capital had largely been
forgotten by the time, more than a hundred years later in 1863, when an attempt
was made to revive scientific meteorology there by Robert Hart, inspectorgeneral of the Imperial Chinese Maritime Customs. But before we embark on
that episode we must note some organized efforts to publish meteorological
data for the country. The Canton Register was inaugurated as an Englishlanguage publication in November 1827 and from issue No. 36 in October 1838
it began to carry regularly daily temperature, pressure and wind measurements
for that city, although it does not state where or by whom they were made. The
temperature was quoted to the nearest Fahrenheit degree and the pressure to
1/20th of an inch of mercury. A new journal in the city, the Chinese Repository, in
its first volume in 1833 carried an article on the climate, reproduced some of the
data for 1831 from the Canton Register, but also carried records of temperature
and pressure at Macao from the ‘private diary of Mr. Blettermann’ and rainfall
data at Macao for sixteen years courtesy of a Mr. Beale.21
	
In 1835 Bemerkungen über die klimatischen Verhältnisse des südlichen China
by the pioneering German plant physiologist Franz Julius Ferdinand Meyen
was published in Europe.22 On a round-the-world expedition, 1830–32, he
monitored meteorological conditions four times daily. On the basis of a fourmonth sojourn at Macao and Canton in the autumn of 1831, he presumed to
write an account of the climate of South China. He made observations of the
temperature for a couple of days in August at Northwest Lantau23 — where he
also collected some botanical specimens — before moving on to Macao. There,
for a couple of days he recorded temperature and pressure, followed by two
weeks at Canton where he recorded thermometer and psychrometer (relative


	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

9

humidity) data. Although his report may contain the first meteorological data
from what would become the territory of Hong Kong, his work is less useful
for his own observations than for the compilation of earlier data from Canton
and Macao that he presented. Some of it dates back to 1785, the temperature
and the winds throughout that year at Canton recorded by C.-L.-J. de Guignes,
the French consul in the city at the time.24 Meyen, in furtherance of his
primary interest, botany, took the opportunity of visiting two men in Macao
who cultivated large and mature gardens and found some interesting plant
specimens. But the two men, the same two responsible for the data published
at Canton noted above, were the Dutch general-consul there, Mr. Blettermann
and an English merchant, Thomas Beale, who both dabbled in meteorology and
had accumulated some records on rainfall and temperature.25 From Blettermann
he collected the extensive data on rainfall he had recorded at Macao from 1812
to 1831 (excluding two years). Meyen also presents four years (1827–30) of
temperature data (and one year of pressure data) at Macao recorded by Beale,
and temperature data at Canton for 1829–31 as reported in the Canton Register
of the time. The climate of Canton and Macao was also considered by another
traveller at this time.26 He gave the mean monthly temperature and pressure
during 1831 at Canton, from the Canton Register, and at Macao from a ‘private
diary’ of Mr. Blettermann. Average monthly rainfall over a period of sixteen
years attributed to Mr. Beale was also presented.

The Role of Observatories
As we have noted, established observatories would be the main source of
information on meteorology. Apart from evolving observatories in Japan, which
in the years of interest to us, in their infancy, made but a small contribution to
China Coast meteorology, all such institutions were products of the Western
colonial expansion in that part of the world. As such they must be viewed in the
context of the establishment of observatories overseas by the colonial powers
generally, with the British dictating the paradigm for this study. There were,
however, contributions by the French, the Spanish, the Russians and the Dutch,
and also a tentative role by the quasi-autonomous Imperial Chinese Maritime
Custom Service authorities. The role of observatories in the colonial expansion
of Western powers into Asia is not a simple linear story. All the major colonial
powers devoted effort to some aspects of the physical sciences usually associated
with an observatory and established suitable institutions in that part of the
world. In the case of Hong Kong a direct role in colonial expansion is clear. In
several other cases it was more the fact that observatories, and observers, were
co-opted into the imperial enterprise. However, the aspects emphasized could


10	

Early China Coast Meteorology

vary greatly, and the forces directing them were equally diverse. Astronomy,
meteorology, seismology and geomagnetic phenomena all featured, with greater
or lesser emphasis, in the developments.
	
Astronomy was, of course, the doyen among these subjects, but its
occurrence was more often the default condition of the practical requirements
of providing a time service rather than the academic pastime its practitioners
pursued in other parts and, indeed, would have liked to pursue in the Orient.
Nowhere is this better illustrated than in Hong Kong, where, as we will see, the
frustrated ‘Government Astronomer’ fought a gallant, but unavailing, fight in
defence of his passion for the subject. Nor can anywhere else in the region be
said to have fared any better in this respect. The provision of a time service was
a very important duty in the early days of these observatories, especially at ports
with major shipping traffic such as Shanghai and Hong Kong. Indeed it was
the very raison d’être for the founding of the latter observatory. The demands
for such a service can be seen from the total numbers of vessels entering and
leaving Hong Kong: in 1885, 27 100 (344 sailing), in 1900, 82 500 (78 sailing)
and in 1912, 489 000 (1 sailing), with respective tonnages of 5.66 million, 18.45
million and 36.74 million. But from the intellectual point of view there was
nothing new to be learned from this pursuit and, as it happened, the growth of
telegraphy meant that the importance of locally establishing the time steadily
declined.
	
Seismology, in general, had a more particular local interest but, more
relevantly, the subject was far from being easily understood and, at the same
time, was of little practical application. Only true devotees were involved. The
most intriguing subject in our purview of subjects studied in the observatories
is terrestrial magnetism. The magnetic compass was an essential of navigation,
both by sea and surface, and an accurate map of the geomagnetic field was a
prime necessity, but the study of magnetism went far beyond such a pedestrian
requirement. The analogue, in the nineteenth century, of a modern hightechnology laboratory was a geomagnetic observatory. No expense was spared in
furnishing such laboratories world-wide with the most sensitive of instruments,
monitoring the time variability of the components of the earth’s magnetic field.
Once set up, such a laboratory was relatively easy to maintain, but did require
a dedicated observer to supervise the observations. It must often have seemed
a thankless task, but they contributed to the very foundations of the subject of
geophysics, one might almost say, when correlations with solar conditions are
acknowledged, cosmic physics.
	
Meteorology, however, was the paramount subject justifying the existence
of these observatories. Not only did the expansion in sea and, later, air travel
mean that it came to play an increasingly important role, but there was much
that was new to be learned. This was especially the case with regard to storms



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

11

in the Pacific and the China Sea, which were such a source of destruction to life
and property both on land and on sea. It is recorded that on 17 July 1281 a fleet
of 3500 ships assembled by the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan for an invasion
of Japan was totally destroyed by a typhoon off the coast of Kyushu, and it was
reported that only three of the 100,000 men aboard made it back to China.
Storms in Europe, the Indian Ocean and the Antilles had been extensively
studied by the middle of the nineteenth century and it remained to establish
their nature and properties in the Far East. The historical importance of all
the observatories in that part of the world lies almost entirely in the advances
achieved by their pioneering staff in understanding such meteorological
phenomena, and in weather forecasting.

The Earliest European Institutions
The Russian Observatory at Peking
The earliest of the European-run meteorological services in Asia was a small
unit attached to the Russian Orthodox Mission in Peking from 1841. In 1849
this was expanded to a magnetic cum meteorological observatory which was
constructed on the grounds of the Embassy, and it recorded data sporadically
until 1863.27 In 1867 the Academy of Science in St. Petersburg took over the
operation and dispatched Dr. Hermann Fritsche as director of the Peking
Observatory. For the next sixteen years Fritsche coordinated a systematic
programme of magnetic and meteorological observations, some of them at
stations away from Peking. In 1877, at Shanghai, he published The Climate of
Eastern Asia, the first substantial work (230 pages) on meteorology in that part
of the world. It is perhaps a surprise to find Fritsche decrying the adoption of
the metric system by European meteorologists (which, perforce, he had to use
himself) since he was of the opinion that the French system differed more from
the so-called natural measure than the English, and only ‘France with its small
territory’ would be at a disadvantage if English standards were used.28 Much of
his book is devoted to tables of temperature, pressure and cloud cover (minima,
maxima and means), mostly at North Asian locations but including Shanghai,
Fuzhou, Keelung, Canton, Hong Kong and Bangkok. We shall have cause to
refer to it from time to time later.



12	

Early China Coast Meteorology

The Imperial Chinese Customs: Robert Hart
An important figure in early meteorology in China is Robert Hart, the inspectorgeneral of the Imperial Chinese Maritime Customs. The Chinese Maritime
Customs, later when amalgamated with the Qing office of foreign affairs (the
Tsungli Yamen), the Imperial Chinese Maritime Customs, was originally set up
in 1854 as a foreign-operated institution by the Shanghai municipal authorities
and the foreign consuls in the city. Although later formally part of the Qing
administration, the British always retained a dominant position in the unit. 		
	
Hart, an Irishman, was its long-serving second head (1863–1910). In the
event, his efforts in meteorology, always but a very small part of his portfolio,
were of much value, although much less successful than he had hoped for. Hart
had already coordinated the customs medical officers at stations in the treaty
ports into a data-gathering body for providing half-yearly reports, which went
on to become a very successful operation.29 Encouraged by this, and mindful that
climatic factors was one of the categories encompassed in that work, in November
1869 he devised a similar plan to encompass meteorology in the Empire.30 He
wrote to the commissioners at fourteen Customs stations informing them that
he intended a meteorological station to be associated with each Customs office.
They would be equipped with the necessary apparatus, and ‘two or three simple
books on Meteorology etc’. He originally saw the collection of data would also
be done by lighthouse keepers at the many new lighthouses established along
the coast. They would report, at least initially, to a meteorological department
under the statistical secretary and the marine secretary, resident at Shanghai,
although he hoped that ‘in a few years these meteorological stations will … have
at their head an observatory to be established in connection with the Peking
college [Tongwen Guan]’. The Tongwen Guan, originally founded in 1862 as a
college for interpreters, was later expanded and became the premier venue for
the expansion in the teaching of mathematics and the physical sciences in the
country. It was under the administration of the Customs Service.
	
It was not until four years later that Hart became really enthusiastic about
encompassing meteorology in the Custom Service’s activities, observing that:
‘the Medical Reports are a success … the meteorological observations and
exchange of weather-news will, in time, fill up the gap and help to give the West
sets of facts concerning the East that must prove most useful to scientific men’,31
and ‘if comparative meteorology is to accomplish anything anywhere anyday, I
fancy our Stations will be as near the front as any others. I seem to have kept
it back until just the right moment’.32 He would be sorely disappointed. He
took steps to equip these stations. In March 1873 he asked J. D. Campbell,
his agent in London, to consult with the astronomer royal on the required
instrumentation, of which twenty sets would be purchased. Twelve sets were to



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

13

be sent, he hoped by August of that year, to Shanghai, and eight to the Customs
agent in Hong Kong,33 but later, on 29 May, he speaks only of twelve sets to be
sent to the ‘cosmopolitan stations’.34 It is almost certain that his original idea to
have sets of instruments sent to Hong Kong was not followed up, for reasons we
cannot discern.
	
The unknown context, however, may explain a certain coolness detectable
in his attitude later to the observatory established there; he appears to have
had no input in the setting up of the observatory. He also wished his proposal
to be made widely known among scientific circles at home, although he was
not convincingly clear as to what would be achieved, at one time writing: ‘find
out if there is any special line in which such stations can be made useful —
either to established receptacles of knowledge, or to isolated experimentalists,
specialists, etc.’ and at another: ‘here … there is a movement under way to
assist science and give shipping the benefit of the information supplied by daily
observations’.35 For a man educated in the liberal arts (Greek, Latin, English
literature, modern languages, etc.) at Queen’s University, Belfast, Hart always
showed a shrewd scientific sense, here wanting to know: ‘which will be the best
hours to take [the observations] and what will be the very smallest number to
be taken daily to be compatible with utility’. By May of that year he had drawn
up an ambitious list of sites along the Asian coast accessible by telegraph where
he hoped to have meteorological stations established — Posiet (Vladivostock),
Yokohama, Nagasaki, Newchwang, Hankow, Lamock Islands (near Shantou),
Hong Kong, Manila, Saigon, Bangkok, Singapore and Batavia, and had written
to the relevant authorities in this context. Already, he reported, the ‘Chinese
Customs are going to send weather news by telegraph every morning from
Shanghai to Hong Kong, Amoy and Nagasaki’.36 Some of the instruments arrived
at Shanghai by early December, ‘two whole and four smashed barometers’, but
these broken instruments were not his only difficulty.
	
Others were to arise on two fronts, with the Chinese authorities — perhaps
not unanticipated — but also apparently, elsewhere. In his letter to Campbell,
on 18 October 1873, he writes: ‘The [meteorological] work can be put off for
another year: it will be better to begin well than to begin badly. You may be
on the lookout for a meteorologist: but do not engage one until you have my
positive orders to do so. I do not quite like the intensity of “Brother J’s” interest:
to me it looks like a desire to take the lead out of our hands, and I shall not
authorize you to visit W. for the present’.37 A month later he is writing: ‘we’ll
have to go at Meteorology very gradually’38 and in December: ‘Meteorology
will not be in working order for two years more: but “Hart” is long, if time is
fleeting’. If we take the identification by the editors of the letters, of ‘Brother J’
with John Bull, i.e. England, and ‘W’ with Whitehall, it seems that the Colonial
Office, with which Hart had no official relations, was taking an interest in the


14	

Early China Coast Meteorology

matter — here, perhaps, lies another possible explanation for the total absence
of any reference to Hart in the setting up of the Hong Kong Observatory. An
antagonism in this direction is also suggested by Hart’s unfavourable opinion
of a Mr. Wodehouse who applied for a meteorological position, ostensibly
because he was an amateur, but, as the editors of his letter suggest, the fact that
Wodehouse was ‘a man of very high standing in the Colonial Service’ did not
endear him to the inspector general.39
	
Campbell informed Hart of the high opinion of Mr. Blanford, the
meteorological reporter for Bengal, of his scheme: ‘but thinks it too “ambitious”
and fears it will fail unless you can get a man, who thoroughly understands
such work, to carry it out’.40 He finally decided that the data from the chain
of coastal stations would be channelled to the head station in Peking and the
programme directed by an astronomer stationed at the Tongwen Guan. A very
suitable candidate for the astronomer’s post was found, one Ralph Copeland,
and in a letter to Campbell of 30 September 1874, he writes: ‘Herewith authority
to appoint Copeland … the “Chair” means schoolmaster’s work, … life in
China has many drawbacks: on the other hand it is possible that if he “takes
well”, he may make a career, for the Chinese have an immense reverence for
Astronomy’.41 Mr. Copeland had some short-term plans, including a visit to
Mauritius for observing the transit of Venus in late 1874, but such a delay was
deemed acceptable and, for Copeland, turned out to be fortunate, for when
the time came around that he was free to go to China the whole scheme had
fallen through. The Chinese authorities appear to have had a change of heart,
probably a reluctance to see further encroachment by foreigners in its territory
in a sensitive field, though not so explained by Hart when he wrote to Campbell
in January 1876 that: ‘the Yamen has backed out of its desire to have a Professor
of Astronomy and says we must wait. I tell them they have lost such a chance
as they’ll never have again. They reply. “There’s corn in Egypt”.’42 No more is
heard of his proposal. Copeland went on to a distinguished career: professor
of astronomy at Edinburgh and eventually astronomer royal for Scotland. As
will be seen later, after 1882 the Jesuit observatory at Zikawei took over the
coordination of data monitored by Customs officers along the coast, while
the founding director of the Hong Kong Observatory was to come across the
meteorological instruments, still stored unboxed, in the Custom Houses at
Shanghai and Xiamen in the autumn of 1883 to begin a new phase in the story.43
	
The attitude of reluctance of the Chinese Imperial government in respect
of making use of foreign expertise contrasts with that of contemporary Meiji
Japan, where foreigners were conscripted, at very attractive rates of pay, but for
just such duration as enabled their expertise to be transferred to local students.
A notable example was the unemployed ex-master of the Hong Kong Mint,
Thomas William Kinder, whose salary as director of the Osaka Mint in 1870



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

15

was 50% more than that of the Japanese prime minister. There was also in
China a failure to abjure traditional thinking. What one writer has described as
‘moral meteorology’ still held a place in Imperial decrees, where the visitations
of unwelcome climatic conditions was attributed to objectionable behaviour by
the local population or their officials.44 As late as 1870 the emperor in a decree
blamed floods, droughts and deficient harvests on unhappiness in heaven with
officials, great and small, in this echoing the earlier ‘moral meteorological
analysis’ of the Yongzheng Emperor:
We are of the opinion that although icy hail commonly occurs in the
northern regions, yet the disasters suffered by the villages of Xuanhua
seem uniquely severe, and rarely seen in recent times. It is evident that
Heaven Above has been sending signs again and again to warn Xuanhua.
If by any chance the local officials or common peoples regard these as
accidents due to natural causation then they are inferior people who do
not know how to tremble in fear and reflect on their transgressions.45

	
In summary, it may be said that Hart overreached himself in his enthusiasm
for meteorology, but his efforts were not totally in vain. Although lacking
any formal integrating structure, meteorological recordings at the Customs
stations were begun. Fritsche presents sporadic data on temperature and
pressure, starting in 1871 from Imperial Maritime Customs stations at Chefoo,
Newchang, Taku and Kelung. However, he considered the observations not of
very great use, ‘being very incomplete, and obtained with instruments whose
corrections are not known’.46 Some further information on observations made at
the treaty ports is available in a recent publication.47 When Doberck arrived on
the scene at Hong Kong some use could be made of the archived instruments,
and data from the Customs stations were later to play an important role in the
development of synoptic meteorology in the region. However, the prosecution
of meteorology in a professional manner in China would have to wait a few
years more until the establishment of the Zikawei Observatory at Shanghai by
the Jesuits in 1873.

The Established Observatories
In the Europe of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the attraction of distant
parts for students of the botanical and zoological sciences was obvious, as much
from the point of view of gainful pursuit as the pursuit of pure science itself.
And, indeed, such studies were enthusiastically pursued in the newly acquired
colonies in both contexts. The case of the physical sciences was not so clear cut.
By and large, exotic locations did not offer an advantage in studying them and
their pursuit ‘overseas’ hinged very much on their utilitarian value. This aspect



16	

Early China Coast Meteorology

of the history of science has been vigorously promoted by commentators on
‘colonial science’ in recent times, and, indeed, the argument may be valid, but
it certainly needs more investigation than it has received heretofore.48 Before
looking into the observatories that had an important impact on the one that was
to develop in Hong Kong, it is interesting to look briefly at some other related
institutions.
	
The nineteenth century brought a flourishing of scientific-related activity
generally and advances in meteorology became important from a practical point
of view. However, it is with a brief consideration of geomagnetic monitoring that
we introduce the ‘overseas’ observatories. Following C. F. Gauss’s suggestion
of a systematic study of the earth’s magnetic field, an international array of
monitoring stations was supported by the British government — the earliest
example of what would later be termed a ‘campaign’. Under the supervision
of Edward Sabine at the Royal Society, stations at Toronto, South Africa,
St. Helena and Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania) — the ‘Colonial Observatories’
— were equipped with instruments designed by Humphrey Lloyd in Dublin.
They monitored the field hourly (and for short periods, every few minutes),
for a period of at least three years between 1840 and 1850. Meteorological
observations did tag along — the temperature, in particular, was required for
reducing the magnetic data — but otherwise it was a low priority concern. These
colonial observatories were the prototype for later meteorological observatories,
notably those at Mauritius and Hong Kong.
	
There were observatories at Madras and at Bombay but the most influential
of the early observatories in the Indian Ocean, and one which could play a role
model for a similar establishment at Hong Kong, was that operating at Mauritius.
Time-keeping, meteorology and geomagnetic recording were practised at a
public observatory on the island of Mauritius from as early as 1831, but it was
1874 when The Royal Alfred Observatory attained the status of a government
department and became operational. Its first director was Dr. Charles Meldrum,
a pioneer in the study of tropical storms. There was a lot of maritime traffic
in the Indian Ocean, and good seamen’s practice was that the meteorological
situation should be regularly recorded in the ship’s log. Among the important
parameters were the barometric pressure, the wind strength and direction, and
the temperature. When later reduced and collated, such data, when combined
with observations from the islands of Rodrigues, St. Brandon, Agalega, Diego
Garcia and the Seychelles, enabled charts, so-called synoptic charts, of the
situation at some earlier times to be drawn, which, if without direct forecasting
potential, could reveal some useful information. On such a basis Meldrum
first established the spiral motion of the wind inwards towards the centre of a
tropical storm.49 This study gave rise to the well-regarded ‘Meldrum’s rules’ for
sailors when encountering such a storm.50



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

17

	
East Asia provided a notable void in the availability of global climatic data
from before about 1875 — data which would be of considerable contemporary
interest in the context of assessing the status of global climate change.
Quantitative meteorology only became a subject of organized study from about
that time.

The Philippines
Of all the external institutions that were to have an impact on the study of
meteorology in Hong Kong, none rivalled in importance the observatory at
Manila, even if the first director of the Hong Kong Observatory did not quite
see the relationship in this way. By the mid-nineteenth century the extent of
the great Spanish empire had dwindled to a few remote colonies. Although the
Philippines was the largest of these, it was very much neglected, and education
was poorly provided for. There were universities, but science was totally
lacking from their curricula. The setting up of observatories under Spanish
and French control fell to the private sector, in the guise of Jesuit missionaries.
Suppressed for forty-one years from 1773 — at a time when they controlled
thirty astronomical observatories — the Society of Jesus was re-established in
1814 and steadily reclaimed the ground it had occupied in the intellectual world
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Harnessing advances in scientific
knowledge in the cause of evangelization, as they had done with astronomical
knowledge at Peking in earlier years, they set about establishing institutions of
learning in various parts of the world. The first half of the nineteenth century
had seen major advances in the field of meteorology which elevated it to a
subject of great practical utility and thus recommended itself as a vehicle for
their aims, much as a later generation of missionaries would see medical skills
as an opportunity in the same cause.
	
Meteorological recordings in the Philippines were started, as a hobby, at
the Ateneo, the Jesuit school in Manila, by Fr. Francisco Colina in 1860. Colina
began publishing his observations in a local newspaper and these, together with
the passage of a major typhoon over the city in 1865, stimulated local interests
to contribute for the provision of meteorological instruments. These enabled
regular monitoring and forecasting to be carried out from that year onwards, and
the operation informally became known as the ‘observatory’ and Fr. Colina as
its ‘director’. The importance of the school as a meteorological observatory dates
from 1866, with the arrival there of Federico Faura, who put the Observatory
on a firm footing.51 Faura’s first interest was astronomy, and with two assistants
he joined a Dutch team to observe a total solar eclipse in 1868 on the small



18	

Early China Coast Meteorology

island of Mantawalok in the Celebes.52 They were brought there on a British
ship under a Captain Charles Bullock, who also reported to London on his
observations of the phenomenon. The attention of Europe to an observatory
operating in Manila was drawn by the results of the photographs taken by
the Manila priests being published in Rome by the leading astronomer Pietro
Angelo Secchi.53 Faura then returned to Europe for seven years, spending time
with Secchi in Rome, and at the Stonyhurst Observatory in England. Stonyhurst
at the time was one of the seven first-class meteorological stations of the British
Meteorological Office and had a well-known observatory for geomagnetism. He
returned to Manila in 1878 to become director of the Observatory, a position he
held for ten years. He immediately began his investigations into typhoons. His
timely warning of the approach of major typhoons on two occasions in 1879
greatly raised the prestige of the Observatory.
	
The study of meteorology, and especially the role of weather forecasting,
had been revolutionized in Europe and North America from mid-century by
the introduction of cable telegraphy. The possibilities of this new technology
in East Asia were not as readily realized, but from 1 May 1880 Manila was in
telegraphic contact with Hong Kong. Knowing of the Observatory’s expertise in
storm warning, the government of Hong Kong requested their forwarding to the
port, and this led the Spanish governor of the Philippines to set up a committee
to look into the matter generally. The result was a proposal, drafted by Faura,
to establish a government-supported meteorological service, to be managed by
the Jesuits. It took the home authorities in Madrid three years to take action
and grant the Observatory official status as headquarters of the Meteorological
Service of the Philippines. In 1886 it moved out of the old city to occupy several
buildings which were part of a newly constructed school in Ermita. At that time
it embraced ten other monitoring stations in the islands.54 The Observatory
was divided into four sections, for meteorology, astronomy, geomagnetism and
seismology, respectively. Equipped with a meridian telescope by Dollond, the
Observatory assumed responsibility for official time-keeping in the Colony
in 1885, dropping a time-ball at noon daily, which was followed by a cannon
shot in the Manila harbour. From 1880 Faura had regularly sent messages to
Hong Kong, so that his observatory was seen as an important complementary
component when plans for an observatory were being drawn up there in 1881.
In the context of these messages, we will later have more to say on Fr. Faura,
his successor José Algué and the Manila Observatory. Faura was succeeded by
José Algué in 1897; Algué had studied at Georgetown University with Hagen
and had worked with the distinguished meteorologist Vines in Havana. In 1901
the American administration entrusted the direction of the new Philippines
Weather Bureau to the Observatory, with Algué as director.55


	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

19

China: Zikawei
French contributions to systematic meteorology in the East centre on Shanghai,
and to a lesser extent on their colonies in Indo-China, the former, courtesy
of the Jesuits. Notwithstanding the fact that for 150 years they had served as
directors of the Imperial Observatory in Peking, the beginnings of a revived
scientific presence by the Jesuits in China, almost contemporaneous with those
in Manila, were similarly modest. The role of some early French Jesuits in
meteorological observations at Peking has been described above. When they
returned to China in 1842 they started with a college and seminary at Zikawei,
a suburb of Shanghai (now in Shanghai city proper). Starting in 1868, under the
direction of Fr. P. M. Heude, they developed a museum of natural history, the
first of its kind in China, which attained international recognition. Following
that, in 1873, they again started reporting meteorological observations. Some
observations from Shanghai in the period 1848–53 and in the late 1860s also
exist.56 In August 1872 they decided to establish a Jiangnan Association for
Science — Jiangsu and Anhui constitute the diocese of Jiangnan — which
would incorporate a meteorological observatory at Zikawei under the direction
of Fr. A. Colombel.57 The Observatory was equipped with a barometer (Fortin),
maximum and minimum thermometers and a psychrometer of French
manufacture, all calibrated at the Observatory of the Meteorological Society of
Paris, and started publishing data from January 1873 in a Bulletin Météorologique.
The bulletin’s ornate banner reading ‘A. M. D. G.’ [Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam], the
motto of the Jesuits, was the only indicator of any evangelical content.
	
The professionalism of a modern observatory, however, only dates from
the following year when Marc Dechevrens arrived to take up the directorship,
and lead it to recognition as a first class observatory. Dechevrens, a sometime
teacher of physics in the Jesuit College Vaugirard in Paris, spent three months
before embarking for the East at Stonyhurst Observatory, familiarizing himself
with meteorological and geomagnetic observing practices. In June 1874 he
reported his first measurements of the magnetic field at Zikawei.58 Like his
contemporary Faura in Manila, Dechevrens took a keen interest in typhoons,
and on the basis of a major one that struck Shanghai in 1879 wrote a detailed
study of the storm and its effects, including an early trajectory for such a storm,
which won favourable comment. These developments led the International
Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai to suggest the possibility of Dechevrens
heading up a typhoon signal service for the city and the coast. They would
provide some support for his work, and it was expected that Sir Robert Hart and
the Chinese Maritime Customs Service would supply the Zikawei Observatory
with regular meteorological observations from the coastal stations. Together
with data collected from ships and lighthouses, and reports from Manila and


20	

Early China Coast Meteorology

Tokyo, Dechevrens was able to publish a pamphlet giving an account of the
typhoons of 1882. For the first time in that part of the world, in the words of a
reviewer in Nature, he ‘has been able to … trace the history of several typhoons
from their cradle in the equatorial maritime regions to their grave in the North
Pacific Ocean’.59 We shall return to this project later.
	
From 1884 a time service was provided for ships in the Shanghai harbour,
using a Billant equatorial telescope for calibration, by dropping a time-ball at the
Observatory at noon, and firing a cannon from the harbour. In 1884 Dechevrens
devised a storm warning system, which was to be widely used in the region, and
which could be transmitted to the harbour at Shanghai via a newly installed
telegraphic link with his observatory.60 Despite the frosty attitude of Doberck
in Hong Kong, the Zikawei Observatory, with some financial assistance from
Chinese and English insurance companies, would establish itself as the premier
meteorological observatory in the East. Under the leadership of Stanislas
Chevalier and, especially from 1897, Louis Marie Froc, its operations embraced
most of East Asia. By 1904, Zikawei was receiving 150 telegraphic bulletins
daily from 60 stations, ranging in latitude from Yap (9° 25´N) to Tomsk (56°
30´N), 14 from Japan and Formosa, 11 from Siberia, 6 from Indochina, 6 from
the Yangtze valley, and 11 from the China coast, among others. It took one
Jesuit the better part of a day to make sense of them and prepare the forecast.61
The Observatory’s activities in magnetic monitoring and in astronomy would go
on to become major autonomous operations.

South-East Asia
Above and beyond the Jesuit contribution, there were some more official
French contributions to meteorology in the region. Dr. Alfred-Emile Borius,
the surgeon general in Tonkin, was also an enthusiastic amateur meteorologist
who had worked in Africa. He was charged with setting up a meteorological
service in 1884 for Indochina based on Haiphong. Although he was dead within
a year, he had already established regular telegraphic contact with the Hong
Kong Observatory, and was exchanging observations twice a day with them.
According to the Hong Kong Daily Press in 1884, he acknowledged ‘information
about typhoons from here, the necessity for which was made apparent by the
disastrous typhoon of 8 July [1884] that ravaged Haiphong, the course of which
was forecast here by the Government Astronomer, whose subsequent telegrams
Dr. Borius states to have produced great effect and to have convinced the most
skeptical’.62 From a meteorological point of view, Hong Kong stood in relation
to Indochina very much as Manila stood in relation to Hong Kong; important



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

21

traffic was to a large extent one way. Apart from dispatching routine readings
by telegraph, no great activity there followed Borius’s death until the end of the
century. The French administration then decided on a more comprehensive
meteorological service and, in 1898, employed the services of the experienced
Fr. Froc from the Zikawei Observatory to identify a suitable location for an
observatory, and engaged his help in designing the observatory buildings.
His choice of Phu Lien, nine kilometres south of Haiphong, became the site
of the Phu Lien Observatory (also known as Tonkin Observatory, Haiphong
Observatory). Apart from the major observatories in the East, it also received
reports from French observers in Yunnan, Guangdong and Guangxi, but it
was 1905 before it was fully operational, too late to make much impression
on our story.63
	
A Magnetical and Meteorological Observatory at Batavia was started in
1875 under Dr. Pieter Adriaan Bergsma as director, but he died en route to the
Netherlands in 1882. For most of the time 1883–99, although well funded, it
lacked consistent leadership (part of the time under J. P. van der Stok), and it
only gained fame from the early years of the twentieth century onwards.64 It
never had telegraphic connection with Hong Kong.

Japan
Although not strictly a component of the ‘colonial observatories’, early
instrumental meteorology in Japan was largely in the hands of expatriates. The
country in these early days played but a small role in regional meteorology.
Only after the Meiji Restoration in 1867 did instrumental meteorology gain
a foothold there. Hakodate Meteorological Station started in 1872. Europeans
and Americans, no less than in the Philippines or China, played the lead
role in this development, in the guise of yatoi, specialists recruited by the
Japanese government to facilitate the entry of modern scientific methods into
the administration of the Empire. Previous recordings of meteorological data,
by visitors, were much less common than in the case of China because of the
severely limited mobility of foreigners in the country. However, in recent years
some early records have been located. Some data for Nagasaki and Tokyo (Edo)
collected by a German doctor serving with the Dutch colony at Nagasaki from
1819 to 1828 survive, and there is a series of data from 1839 to 1855 recorded in
the native observatory at Tokyo devoted to maintaining the calendar. The Dutch
themselves started recording basic climatic data on Dejima Island (Nagasaki) from
1845.65 The earliest comprehensive recordings of meteorological parameters are by
Erwin Knipping, and date from 1872. Dr. Knipping was a German mathematician



22	

Early China Coast Meteorology

at the University of Tokyo and he took a professional approach to the subject.
Starting with data from October 1872, he regularly published monthly
summaries of meteorological parameters (and sometimes daily observations)
and his data were widely distributed.66 He also published some material
on typhoons related to those islands. Later, Thomas Corwin Mendenhall,
a professor of physics in the same university also started publishing
meteorological recordings. The Tokyo Meteorological Observatory was set up
in 1875, followed by observatories at Osaka (1883) and Kobe (1897). Storm
warnings were hoisted, starting from 1883.

Early Meteorology in Hong Kong
Anecdotal records of some of the great storms in the counties adjacent to Hong
Kong from the Song to the Qing dynasties (thirteenth to nineteenth century)
have been preserved.67 In July 1841, in the earliest stages of the settlement by
the British, a major typhoon struck, for which we have vivid reminiscences68
and, according to Eitel its near-annihilation of Hong Kong brought rejoicing
in Imperial circles.69 If we ignore the very cursory observations by Meyen
on Lantau in 1831, the earliest recorded readings were made by the British
authorities. From day one of their occupation they monitored the basic
meteorological parameters and as early as 1845 published in The Friend of China
and the Hong Kong Government Gazette a ‘Meteorological Register’. A summary
of the earliest data has been given by Ho.70 Both the locations and the times
where the observations were made changed over time. More devoted attention
to meteorology resulted in a network of seventeen stations across the globe,
including Hong Kong, under British Royal Engineer officers being established
in 1851, later (1 April 1862) transferred to the Army Medical Department.
Climate at the time was seen as a major factor in medical conditions. Some
of them, including Hong Kong, reported until December 1884, when the
operation was disbanded.71 These observations were, it seems, sometimes made
in parallel with other observations. The Hong Kong Government Gazette was set
up in September 1853, and from 29 April 1854 carried systematic reporting
of these observations in the form of monthly averages (at five recording times
daily) of pressure, wet and dry bulb thermometer, and associated dew point and
humidity for the previous year taken at the Seamen’s Hospital in Wanchai. A Dr.
James B. Thompson addressed some remarks on the climate of Hong Kong at a
meeting of the Royal Geographical Society in London in 1845, but he focused
mainly on the precautions Europeans should take to avoid illness.72 The first
published summary of the climate in Hong Kong seems to be that of a Dr. Smart
at the Royal Naval Hospital in 1863, but he gives no information on typhoons.73



	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

23

He analyzed the local data, pressure and temperature from 1853 to 1858. He also
compared the average of this six years’ temperature data with those reported
from Macao by Beale twenty years before, noted earlier, and commented on a
‘great want of accordance’. Seeing that he could find good agreement between
current data from Hong Kong and Canton, he concluded that ‘in the Macao
series the instruments used may have been less exact than those with more
modern improvements’. This illustrates just one of the many pitfalls modern
day climatologists have to circumvent in their study of past records.
	
Quite detailed reporting of meteorological parameters in the Gazette began
in February 1861 when bi-daily (9 a.m., 3 p.m.) readings at the Government
Civil Hospital (later Government Lock Hospital) for every day in the previous
month were presented as ‘Meteorological Tables’ and continued, with only
slight interruption, until the opening of the new observatory in 1884.
Considering that they could hardly have served any practical use in the colony
and were presumably offered as a contribution to the cause of pure science, the
regularity, usually weekly, with which the data were published is impressive.
They were sometimes summarized in global compilations, e.g. in 1863 the
average monthly temperatures, as by then established, were published in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.74 But as with the data from other
stations, it is not clear to what other purpose they obtained. To quote one
writer: ‘it is possible that the Army Medical Department put them to practical
use, but it seems more likely that they were stored on a shelf and forgotten’.75
In parallel with these data, from 24 November 1860 the Gazette every week
printed ‘Weather Tables’ (from July 1876 titled ‘Meteorological Observations’)
which contained data taken three times a day, at 6 a.m., 12 and 6 p.m. Initially the
measurements were of the temperature and pressure as recorded at the Harbour
Master’s Office on Queen’s Road and on the Peak, but they were eventually
extended to include dry and wet bulb thermometers, maxima and minima, the
wind and the weather, and to include reports also from Police Gap Station,
Stonecutter’s Island and Cape d’Aguilar. From May 1876 the Daily Press also
carried a ‘China Coast Meteorological Register’ which gave data for the previous
day at Hong Kong, Shanghai, Xiamen and Nagasaki. There was thus no scarcity
of recorded data, but the practical utility of the efforts must be questioned:
published figures were never less than a week old, and usually much longer
after the event. The quality of the data was also questionable in some cases;
certainly the future director of the Observatory did not have a very high opinion
of its reliability.76 A summary of some of the results is given by Ho.77 In terms
of the acquisition of basic meteorological data the existing arrangements by
the end of the 1870s were probably adequate or, at most, required some closer
supervision of the instruments used.



24	

Early China Coast Meteorology

	
What was not adequately provided for was any kind of forecasting, and
especially warning of, approaching typhoons. This was illustrated by the case
of a big typhoon that struck Hong Kong in September 1874 and claimed more
than 2500 victims. In his history of the times, Eitel, a witness to the event, gives
a colourful account of it.78 An account of the storm was also carried in Nature,
which claimed, inter alia, that an earthquake occurred while the typhoon was
raging.79 This was based on the fact that several public clocks stopped at the
same time, just the time when the storm was registered at being at its peak.
This was not the first suggestion of the possible association of an earth tremour
with a typhoon, but none of the evidence was unambiguous.80 The prominent
meteorologist and author, Piddington, had drawn attention to the need for
study of the matter, but his work seems to have been overlooked by the Nature
columnist. Some years later, in 1894, Fr. Algué in Manila hit upon microseismic
movements as possible precursory signals for a typhoon and devoted a chapter
to them in his book.81 The Manila observatory was doing seismic monitoring
at the time, taking readings of a tromometer (a primitive seismograph) every
hour. From his own observations on several storms Algué argued that the main
disturbances occurred when the storm was over land, and in particular when
it was incident on a mountain range. It would be many more years before it
became established that microseisms can be produced, mainly by the oceanic
convulsions which result from cyclonic storms. Indeed these disturbances can
now be used to estimate the locations of typhoons over the sea. It is likely
that such travelling microseismic disturbances will act as a trigger for a more
significant tremour in a region where critical crustal stresses already occur.
	
An alternative proposal for the association of seismic movement with
typhoons is the proposal that a sudden release of pressure, as would occur
when the eye of a typhoon passes over land, may play a similar role in releasing
pent-up stresses. The latter hypothesis, now seldom embraced, was especially
propounded by Fr. Ernesto Gherzi, a later director of Zikawei, and post-1949 a
member of staff of the Hong Kong Observatory.82 This has been an opportunity
to mention, however briefly, the aspect of seismology in an observatory and to
note that we will not be returning to it. Although obviously of great importance
in places like Japan and the Philippines, in the days before nuclear power
stations were contemplated it was realized that little practical benefit to the
Hong Kong community could accrue from a pursuit of this discipline. There
were occasional, fleeting references to the introduction of seismology into the
future Hong Kong Observatory, notably efforts in 1898 from London to establish
seismic monitoring. This was aborted, ostensibly on the grounds of the, not
very large, cost, but with the hand of the governor strengthened by the director’s
reluctance to get involved, citing lack of space and shortage of manpower at
the Observatory.83 It would be 1921 before instrumentation appropriate to the


	

Nineteenth-Century Observatories	

25

study of the subject would be installed in the Colony. The memory of the great
storm of 1874 was still very much alive when proposals came to be floated for
an observatory in Hong Kong.
	
Compared to the Indian Ocean and the Caribbean, knowledge of cyclonic
storms in the China Sea by the mid-1870s was very incomplete. It is clear that
at the time a very promising field of study was waiting to be undertaken. The
coordination of meteorological monitoring in Hong Kong was in the hands of
the harbour master, and it is from his office that the first mention of a practical
aspect of meteorological monitoring appeared, in the form of a notice of
proposed storm warnings published in the 4 August 1877 issue of the Gazette:
In the event of bad weather being apprehended by this Department, a
black drum will be hoisted at the Office Flagstaff. A similar signal will be
hoisted and a gun will be fired from the Police Hulk.
The usual signs of approaching bad weather are a falling Barometer
with high Thermometer, sultriness of the atmosphere, wildness and
discoloration of the clouds, and birds flying about in unusual numbers.
Should these symptoms exist and the wind be anywhere between NorthWesterly and North-Easterly, a typhoon of a severe type may be looked
for.
The same indications of bad weather with the wind between SouthEasterly and South-Westerly, a typhoon may be known to be in the
neighbourhood, but not likely to be severely felt at Hong Kong.

This was repeated, essentially unchanged in 1878, 1879, 1880 (also now in
Chinese — there was some Gazette notification in Chinese in earlier years, e.g.
28 April 1858 related to rates payment, but only in the administration of Pope
Hennessy, from 1 January 1879, was regular notification of items considered of
interest to the local population given in Chinese in the Gazette), 1881, 1882,
1883. These warnings were basically for the information of mariners so they
could decide whether or not to set sail. More local warning signs familiar to the
commercial and boat populations were not countenanced.
	
The weather was not the only factor which motivated the maritime
community to seek an observatory. The availability of a reliable time signal at
the port of Hong Kong was also a high priority and it was this requirement, as
we will see in the next chapter, that acted as a trigger in moving officialdom to
consider the setting up of such an institution.



