2

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

hundred years of industrialization. The relation between humanity and “nature”
has undergone a great transformation, and the constant arrival of ecological crises
and technological disasters has well documented such a historical moment, and
urges for a new direction of humanity to avoid its proper end. The Anthropocene,
announced by geologists such as Paul Crutzen as the successor of the Holocene
(Crutzen 2006), carries such a historical meaning. It also serves as a turning
point for the imagination of another future or beginning—provided that this is
still possible at all. For some political theologians the Anthropocene also represents the apocalyptic moment, in the sense that it will be the kairos that ruptures
the chronos, the deep time of earth proposed by the founder of modern geology
James Hutton towards the end of the eighteenth century (Northcott 2015). I put
the word “nature” in quotation marks since it will be important to first elucidate
its meaning before we can embark on a discussion of a renewed relation between
technology and nature. A facile opposition between technology and nature has
long been made, fostering the illusion that the only way to salvation will be to
give up upon, or else to undermine, technological development. We may also find
the opposite position, in the various discourses on transhumanism, the technological singularity, and eco-modernism, for example, which carry a rather naïve and
corporate-favored idea that we will be able to improve our living situation, repair
environmental destruction with more advanced technology, and intervene within
creation (e.g., through DNA manipulation). Within these discourses there is virtually no question of “nature,” since nature will be merely one of the possibilities of
advanced technologies, and technology is no longer merely prosthetic, meaning
as mere artificial replacement or supplement; instead, the order of things seems to
have reversed, technology is not only supplementary, but rather it becomes itself
the ground in contradistinction to the figure.
In recent decades, even before the concept of the Anthropocene became
popular, anthropologists such as Philippe Descola had been pushing an agenda for
overcoming the opposition between culture and nature, as best detailed in his brilliant systematic work Beyond Nature and Culture (2013). However, this attempt to
overcome the opposition between nature and culture, I will argue, relinquishes the
question of technology too quickly and too easily. The proposal to overcome the
dualism agrees on the urgency of developing a program for the co-existence between humans and non-humans, but it takes a rather simplistic approach and therefore, to some extent, may fail to recognize the real problem of the Anthropocene
as that of a gigantic cybernetic system in the process of realization. Presupposing
such, some profound questions are hidden, and the Anthropocene will continue the

On Cosmotechnics

3

logic of development—a “metaphysics without finality,” as Jean-François Lyotard
puts it (Lyotard and Brügger 1993, 149), until it reaches the point of self-destruction. This article attempts to contribute to a clarification of the relation between
technology and nature, and to the inevitable task for the philosophy of technology
of reflecting on future planetary technological development. It also aims to resolve
the above-mentioned tension through the concept of cosmotechnics, thereby hoping to move beyond the limit of the notion of technology (Heidegger 1977)1 and to
understand it from a truly cosmopolitical perspective.

1. From First Nature to Second Nature
In the two extreme attitudes mentioned above—one focusing on the sacredness
and purity of nature, the other on its mastery—there is a lack of understanding
of the profound question of different forms of participation of both humans and
nonhumans. The participation of the non-human is either eclipsed by the question of technological dominance and mastery and hence rendered insignificant; or
culture is seen as a mere possibility of nature in the sense that nature is the mother
that gives rise to all and to which all will return. I would like to speak instead of
a second nature,2 in order to avoid indulging in an illusion of a pure and innocent first nature, as well as to avoid imprisoning ourselves in a pure technological
rationality.
It is perhaps too obvious to mention that the world is composed of human
and non-humans, and that they participate in different ways in different cultures.
The question is rather: should we take it seriously, and if so, how? Knowing it and
taking it seriously are two different things. The failure of the social constructivism
of the twentieth century, as suggested by the sociologist Andrew Pickering (2017),
should teach us to take these ontologies seriously, since they are not merely “constructed” but “real.” The participation of non-humans varies from one culture
to another according to different cosmologies. These cosmologies are not only
schemas that define the modes of participation, but also correspond to the moral
grounds of such participation. To elucidate this, we only need to remind ourselves
of the role of hau and mana in Marcel Mauss’s ethnography of gift economies
(Mauss 2013), in which the moral obligation has its source in cosmology. A particular form of participation is only justified in so far as it meets or enlightens the
moral—which doesn’t necessarily mean harmony, but rather the codes and belief
that constitute the dynamics of both individual and communal life. We can talk
about the moral only in so far as human beings are being-in-the-world; and the
world is only a world and not a mere environment when it is in accordance with

4

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

such beliefs. It is in the question of second nature that we can locate the question
of the moral, since the moral is only revealed through a certain interpretation of
nature; or to put it differently, nature is known according to orders and exceptions.
In ancient Greece it is known as cosmology: kosmos means order; cosmology, the
study of order. Nature is no longer independent from humans, but rather its other.
Cosmology is not a pure theoretical knowledge; indeed, ancient cosmologies are
necessarily cosmotechnics. Let me give a preliminary definition of cosmotechnics here: it means the unification of the cosmic order and moral order through
technical activities. Human activities, which are always accompanied by technical
objects such as tools, are in this sense always cosmotechnical. Modern technology
has broken down the traditional relation between cosmos and technics; it becomes
a gigantic force, which transforms every being into mere “standing reserve” or
“stock” (Bestand), as Martin Heidegger observes in his famous 1949/1954 lecture
“The Question Concerning Technology” (Heidegger 1977).
Without attempting to exhaust the rich materials we find across the history
of philosophy, starting with the Greek notion of physis and technē, we will firstly
access the notion of nature in light of the recent “ontological turn” in anthropology, a turn associated with figures such as Philippe Descola, Eduardo Viveiros
de Castro, and Bruno Latour, among others. This ontological turn is an explicit
response to the ecological crisis or ecological mutation according to Latour, proposing to take these different ontologies seriously, and to undermine and adjust
the dominant European discourse of naturalism, in order to search for another way
of co-existence. Secondly, I would like to supplement the anthropological work
by suggesting how a co-existence between nature and modern technology can be
conceptualized through the work of the French philosopher Gilbert Simondon.
We will address the recently published posthumous works of Simondon in this
context. We will try to show, in both the work of Simondon and the anthropologists, that the relation between nature and technology has a moral root that has
been deracinated by planetary industrialization; and from there, we will attempt to
address the possibility of a renewed relation between technology and nature, and
thereby shed light on the concept of cosmotechnics.

2. Between Technology and Nature
In the writings of the above-mentioned thinkers, we can find two groups of opposing registers—which at first glance seems rather intriguing, as if there were
a gap between them. Descola speaks of the dualism between culture and nature;
Simondon speaks of the antagonism between culture and technics. Descola’s

On Cosmotechnics

5

culture-nature dualism seems to have assumed that technics falls on the side of
culture, while it is clear that for Gilbert Simondon technics is—at least, in the
course of his writing—not yet fully integrated into culture. For Simondon there
is a misunderstanding and ignorance of technics in culture (Simondon 2012, 10),
which is one of the sources of a double alienation: the alienation of human beings
in the sense of Marx, and the alienation of technical objects—for example, they
are treated as slaves or products of consumption, like the slaves of Roman times
waiting indefinitely in the market for the buyers (Simondon 2014, 58–60). In fact
we can see a rather intriguing parallel between Descola and Simondon, as schematized in the following diagram:
Nature

vs.

Descola

Culture

vs.

Technics

Simondon

Do these different configurations—nature vs culture, culture vs technics—
result from differences between Descola’s and Simondon’s respective disciplines,
or from their different diagnoses of the problems of their time? It is notable that
Descola, the anthropologist of nature, rarely addressed the paleontologist and anthropologist of technology André Leroi-Gourhan, who is an important figure for
Simondon’s thinking of technology.3 It is my contention that the anthropology
of nature and the philosophy of technology should talk to each other in order
to address the question of the Anthropocene. Some readers may doubt if these
two schools of thought can be brought together at all: the anthropological school
is largely rooted in the work of Lévi-Strauss, who adopts a quasi-Kantian transcendental perspective on myths and cosmology, while Simondon’s thought could
be characterized as a transcendental empiricism in the sense of Deleuze, which
is situated in the immanence of relations, energies, and information. However,
this opposition is only apparent, since on the one hand, in Part III of Simondon’s
On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects (2012), he offered a way to situate technical progress beyond the technical reality (e.g., the internal dynamics
of technical objects) towards a cosmic reality; on the other hand, the question of
relation (though somewhat schematized) plays a central role in conceiving the
mode of operation within different ontologies in Descola’s Beyond Nature and

6

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

Culture (not to mention that Viveiros de Castro’s Cannibal Metaphysics (2014)
is a poststructural anthropological treatise inspired by the Deleuzian concept of
intensity). This time we want to switch the context; that is, to facilitate a dialogue
between poststructuralist anthropology and philosophy of technology.

2.1. Dualism between Culture and Nature
The culture vs nature opposition comprises one of the four ontologies that Descola
calls “naturalism,” alongside which he sets three others: “animism,” “totemism,”
and “analogism” (Descola 2013, 122). In naturalism we find the nature/culture
divide, which manifests as a divide between the human and the non-human. Such
a divide is characterized by the physical continuity and the spiritual discontinuity
between humans and non-humans, in which the participation of the non-humans is
limited to being objects of the mastery and domination of the human. It would be
too easy to attribute all these problems to the Cartesian division between subject
and object. However, it is equally difficult to identify the origin of such thinking
without recurring to the dominant philosophical scheme of early modern European philosophy. It is important to acknowledge that naturalism has not existed
since the beginning of European culture; it is actually a “recent” product, or for
Bruno Latour, an “incomplete” product on the sense that “we have never been
modern” (Latour 1993). Descola showed that analogism rather than naturalism
was significantly present in Europe during the Renaissance, and if this is the case,
the “turn” that took place during European modernity seems to have provided
a completely different epistemology regarding the relation between human and
nonhuman, culture and nature, subject and object, and cosmos and physics; an
epistemology that we can retrospectively analyze in the work of Galileo, Kepler,
Newton, and others. If naturalism has succeeded in dominating modern thought it
is because such a peculiar cosmological imagination is compatible with its technological development: nature should be mastered and it can be mastered according
to the laws of nature.
Table 1: The schema of Descola’s four ontologies
Similar interiority,
Dissimilar physicality

Animism

Totemism

Similar interiority,
Similar physicality

Dissimilar interiority,
Similar physicality

Naturalism

Analogism

Dissimilar interiority,
Dissimilar physicality

The Anthropocene is at once the crisis of naturalism and the crisis of modernity. It is under such a crisis that modernity is again called into question (Latour

On Cosmotechnics

7

2013), this time by anthropologists. The ontological turn in anthropology is a
call for a politics of ontologies. What this politics leads to is primarily a pluralism which has been endangered by naturalism’s spread throughout the globe by
colonization. At the center of such a politics is the recognition of a plurality of
ontologies in which natures play different roles in everyday life. Recognition is,
however, only the first step; politics arises in the encounter between these ontologies. What kind of politics will it look like? During the conference “Comment
penser l’Anthropocène,” Descola referred to a story that Bolivia had included the
rights of non-humans within its constitution (Descola 2015). We can understand
this as an institutionalization of ontologies. However, the question that remains to
be answered is what will be the fate of these indigenous ontologies and practices
when confronting modern technology, which is the realization of naturalism? Or
are these “practices” able to transform modern technology so that the latter acquires a new direction of development, a new mode of existence? This is one of the
most crucial questions, since it is also about how to escape both colonialism and
ethnocentrism. Descola frequently uses the word “practice” instead of technics
or technology (Descola 2013). We can understand that he may want to avoid an
antagonism between technics and nature; however, by doing so he also hides the
question of technology. This is not to reproach Descola for forgetting the question
of technics, since he is certainly aware of it when he writes:
Animist “nature” and “supernature” are thus peopled with social collectives
with which humans establish relations that conform with the norms supposed to be shared by all, for when this happens, humans and nonhumans
are not content simply to exchange perspectives. They also, and above all,
exchange signs, which sometimes leads to an exchange of bodies or, at the
very least, indications that, in their interactions, they understand each other.
Those signs cannot be interpreted by either side unless they are underwritten by institutions that legitimate them and make them meaningful, thereby
ensuring that misunderstandings in the communications between the two
species are kept to a minimum. (Descola 2013, 249)

There are codes and institutions; codes are already technical like the ‘protocols.’
However, therein hides another problem, one that is less strategic than ontological.
We will have to recognize that the tension between ontology and technics is not
clearly stated in Descola’s thinking. In speaking of a tension between ontology
and technics I mean that these ontologies are only possible when they are already
complicit with the technical life—ranging over invention, production and daily

8

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

use. As a result, any transformation of the latter will directly alter the former.
The arrival of modern technology in non-European countries in past centuries has
created a transformation unthinkable for European observers. The concept of an
‘indigenous ontology’ itself has to be questioned first, not because it did not exist
but because it is situated in a new epoch and transformed to such an extent that
there is hardly any way to go back to it and restore it. This is precisely the reason
that we have to conceive a cosmotechnical thinking from the standpoint of these
ontologies without falling prey to an ethnocentrism.4 The transformation triggered
by modern technology not only happened in non-European cultures in the course
of colonization, but also in European culture, with the significant difference that,
for the former, it is through the import of such advanced technological apparatus
as military technologies, and for the latter mainly through technological invention.
What is central to the anthropologists’ concept of “nature” and “ontology”
is cosmology, since such “nature” is defined according to different “ecologies
of relations,” in which we observe different constellations of relations, e.g., the
parental relation between females and vegetables, or brotherhood between hunters and animals. These relations can be traced in technical activities such as the
invention and use of tools. It is the reason for which we may want to conceive a
cosmotechnics instead of speaking merely of a cosmology, which may limit us
to discussions on theoretical knowledge and attitudes. Globalized modernization,
Claude Lévi-Strauss has suggested in his Tristes Tropiques, brings forward a new
meaning to the study of anthropology, namely entropology—note that both words
pronounced the same in French (Lévi-Strauss 1992, 414)—entropic in the sense of
the “disintegration” of forms of life through technological transformation, which
silently homogenizes different cosmological relations into one that is compatible
with modern technology. This is the problem of modernity as viewed outside of
Europe, and it is undeniable that globalization has taken such a pace that what
is called indigenous knowledge is marginalized, and the situation will continue
to deteriorate. If we want to conceive the future of the philosophy of technology
we must give it the task of thinking beyond the Western tradition. And in order
to address this task, we must not be satisfied with how useful philosophy is to
technological development and how philosophy can give an account of the ethics
of a particular technology. Rather, we must conceive a philosophy of technology
which tackles the fundamental dualism between nature and technology, humans
and non-humans (animals, plants, machines), modern and non-modern, and go
beyond them against a globalization dominated by the mere discourse of economy
or political economy.

On Cosmotechnics

9

We can identify such an emphasis on the role of cosmology in the work of anthropologists and philosophers such as Viveiros de Castro, Déborah Danowski (cf.
Danowski and de Castro 2016), and Tim Ingold (2014), among many others.5 Here
I will limit myself to addressing an interesting proposal from Donna Haraway.
In her recent work “Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene”
(2016), we find a similar strategy, which also indirectly addresses the question of
technology. Although making no reference to Descola, she addresses the problem
of the Anthropocene in a way that resonates with Descola’s proposal. If Descola
sees politics as the moment of encounter and negotiation of different ontologies,
in a more or less Latourian sense, Haraway does not have a schematic presentation
of ontologies but rather a more generalized conception of non-human politics.
Haraway characterizes the Chthulucene as the next scene after the Anthropocene
and the capitalocene. Chthulucene, according to Haraway, is a compound of two
Greek roots—khthôn and kainos—which means to look from below from the perspective of other forms of living beings (Haraway 2016, 2). As a biologist and
social scientist, Haraway proposes to think of politics as a way of “making kin,” of
conceiving a sympoiesis between different species. This neologism, “sympoiesis,”
relates to both symbiosis and autopoiesis. However, it differs from them since,
firstly, it doesn’t simply mean that which is mutually beneficial (Haraway 2016,
61); and, secondly, it emphasizes the fact that the relation between humans and
other beings are highly interdependent, thus problematizing the “auto-”:
Symbiosis makes trouble for autopoiesis, and symbiogenesis is an even
bigger troublemaker for self-organizing individual units. The more ubiquitous symbiogenesis seems to be in living beings’ dynamic organizing processes, the more looped, braided, outreaching, involuted, and sympoietic is
terran worlding. (Haraway 2016, 61)

It is a “bio-politics” par excellence, as Haraway writes that the “biologies,
arts, and politics need each other; with involutionary momentum, they entice each
other to thinking/making in sympoiesis for more livable worlds that I call the Chthulucene” (Haraway 2016, 98). We can probably summarize Haraway’s proposal
as a “biology contra technocracy,” such that whenever humans develop technologies they will have to assess its impact on other forms of living beings. Haraway’s
approach is deeply ethical, and has the advantage of providing a generalized ontological politics and ethics for overcoming the Anthropocene. The concept of sympoiesis is an attempt to set limits to technocratic development, and the possibility
of sympoiesis becomes the condition for protecting species from destruction. By

10

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

doing so, Haraway does not directly address the question of technology; rather,
like Descola, she abstracts technology as culture, and therefore avoids a direct
confrontation with the question of technology. It is by going to Simondon’s work
that we make the question of and confrontation with technology explicit.

2.2. Antagonism between Culture and Technics
Gilbert Simondon’s work confronts the question of modern technology with rigor.
He also notably influenced other thinkers such as Gilles Deleuze and Bernard
Stiegler (the latter significantly extends the investigations of Simondon into the
realm of contemporary digital technologies and the Anthropocene, cf. Stiegler
2015). It is true that in the work of Simondon, one finds less a reconciliation
between nature and technology as one between technics and culture. As we have
noted before, in the first pages of his On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects (2012), Simondon had already diagnosed the problem of our society: there
is an antagonism of culture against technics which comes from an ignorance and
misunderstanding of the latter. It would not be wise to try to expound the technological thinking of Simondon in this short article; it is sufficient to point out that
this misunderstanding of technics leads to the painful difficulty of co-existence
between human and machines. We can simply understand it in the following ways.
On the one hand, machines become opaque to their users, and only specialists
understand how to repair their parts (and increasingly not the entire machine).
This is one of the sources of alienation in the nineteenth and twentieth-centuries:
workers who are used to practicing with simple tools are not able to cope with the
new operations or understand the technical reality. On the other hand, machines
are treated as merely functional objects, i.e., utilities; they are consumerist products secondary to aesthetic objects, and in extreme cases, slaves, as exhibited in
the public conception of robots. This is why, already on the second page of On the
Mode of Existence of Technical Objects, Simondon writes:
We precisely would like to show that a robot does not exist, and that it is
not a machine, as much as a statue is not a living being, but only a product
of imagination, of fictive fabrication, and of the art of illusion. (Simondon
2012, 18)

Simondon is referring here to an operational and ethical relation between human
and machine. The question of co-existence or being-with is of ultimate importance
in this connection. Haraway and Descola are right to point out the necessity of reconsidering the question of co-existence with nature. However, such co-existence

On Cosmotechnics

11

is only possible when we reflect on the role of technical objects which do not
only have their own existence, but also function as relations with other existences.
The question of co-existence therefore concerns not simply the relations between
the human and the non-human. We must also add to it the question of technical
objects, or machines. It is our task here to point to a thinking that is present in
the work of Gilbert Simondon concerning nature and technology, on the basis of
which we can concretize the task of a philosophy of technology in the age of the
Anthropocene. We may want to consider such thinking of Simondon an ecological
thinking which concerns different modes of reticulation. Or to put it another way:
if there is an ecology in Simondon, it understands technology in terms of modes
of reticulation and technological progress as the constant transformation of forms
of reticulation. This point is evident when we think of the emergence of different
communication networks from analogue to digital in the twentieth century, and
now with all sorts of social networks. However, not all modes of reticulation lead
to a reconciliation between nature and technics; or perhaps we can say that, in
Simondon’s thought, it is characterized by a cosmopoeisis.6 In order to elaborate
on this, we must look into Simondon’s speculative history concerning the genesis
of technicity.
Before we continue our exposition of Simondon’s thought, let us summarize
what we have discussed above. I suggest, firstly, to consider the technical a priori
in the concept of nature, which allows us to abandon a pure and innocent image
of nature and gives us a “second nature”; and, secondly, the cosmic a priori in
technological development, meaning that technics are always already cosmotechnics from the beginning. These are the two sides of the same coin that we call
human existence and human progress. If we can reproach Descola, Haraway and
others with not paying enough attention to the first, we must also reproach the
technocrats for ignoring the latter to the extent that the cosmos becomes simply
a standing reserve for exploitation, in the sense that cosmology becomes mere
astrophysics. I will demonstrate this second point in terms of what I call a cosmogeographic a priori in Simondon’s thinking, which is crucial for the construction
of the techno-geographic milieu.

3. The Cosmo-Geographic A Priori and Co-Naturality
First of all, we must address the question: what is nature for Simondon? In
L”individuation à la lumière des notions de forme et d”information (Simondon
2005), nature is considered as the pre-individual, which is like the apeiron of
Anaximander, an inexhaustible potential (Simondon 2005, 358). The pre-individ-

12

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

ual is what allows further individuation to take place. However, it does not mean
that nature is a reservoir of energy, but rather that it is what is always anterior to
the already individuated being and what gives rise to a second individuation when
conditions are met. For Simondon the history of technology can be seen as a constant progress of the modes of reticulation of spiritual forces. The very beginning
of the history of technology started with what he calls “the magic phase” (2005,
227–28). The reticulation of the magic phase is characterized by what he calls key
points (points clés): for example, a giant tree, a huge rock, a tall peak, or a river.
These geographical points are the key points, which maintain the reticulation of
forces; or more precisely, it is not that these key points are the origin of the forces,
but rather these forces are regulated according to the key points. In the magic
phase, Simondon proposes, there is a form of unity, where there is no distinction
between subject and object; the ground and the figure support each other, meaning
that ground gives form and figures limit the ground, as we see in typical examples
of Gestalt psychology.
The magical universe is already structured, but according to a mode anterior to the segregation of object and subject; this primitive world of structuration is the one that distinguishes figure and ground, by indicating the key
points in the universe . . . in fact, precedent to the segregation of unities, a
reticulation of space and time is instituted, which emphasizes the privileged
places and moments, as if all the power of human action and all the capacity
of the world in influencing humans is concentrated in this place and moment. (Simondon 2012, 227–28)

The de-phasing or phasing out [déphasage] of the magic phase is developed
into technics and religion. The vessels of rite—which are technical objects—become the key points of another mode of reticulation (Simondon 2012, 227). This
is the departing point from which we can thematize the concept of cosmotechnics.
This stage marked an aesthetic thinking which was able to create a convergence
after the bifurcation of religion and technics, but which was later found to be insufficient. In Part III of Simondon’s On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects,
there is a complicit and somewhat problematic tension between what Simondon
calls aesthetic thinking and philosophical thinking (cf. Duhem 2009). Aesthetic
thinking was not able to cope with the constant bifurcation, because aesthetic
thinking is still situational, meaning its role will be to serve as “the paradigm for
orienting and supporting the effort of philosophical thinking” (Simondon 2012,
276), implying that philosophical thinking will have to intervene to bring about

On Cosmotechnics

13

a higher order of convergence. As in Heidegger, in Simondon we find another
presentation concerning the rupture of the relation between technics and nature
during European modernity. Simondon accords with Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s
critique of the encyclopedia of Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond D’Alembert for
its detachment of technics from nature—or, in Simondon’s words, from “the elements” in the sense of the pre-Socratics (e.g., Thales’s water, Heraclitus’s fire, and
Anaximander’s apeiron) (Simondon 2016, 380). The detachment of technics from
nature continued during European modernity, and as Simondon noticed, towards
the end of the eighteenth century, the rupture was amplified to the extent that
the ancient technics were repressed, the relation to the natural world was lost,
and technical objects became “artificial” objects—artificial in the sense that it has
nothing to do with nature (Simondon 2012, 126). This period corresponds to “a
dramatic and passionate notion of progress, becoming rape of nature, conquest of
the world and caption of energies” (Simondon 2012, 17).
It is this question that leads Simondon to mediate on the question of convergence and the possible reconciliation between nature and technology as a task
of philosophical thinking instead of aesthetic thinking. However, it would not
be justified to say that Simondon opposes aesthetic thinking and philosophical
thinking. Simondon’s criticism is that by glorifying the aesthetic value of objects
(what he calls “aesthetic objects” (Simondon 2012, 10)), one tends to reduce the
role of technical objects as mere utility and therefore ignore the signification of
its technical reality; but we will always need aesthetic thinking, and it complements philosophical thinking. Since technics is fundamentally a matter of modes
reticulation, there is always the possibility of reconstituting different key points.
This is just to say that this philosophical-anthropological imagination of unities,
which characterizes the beginning of the genesis of technicity, calls for a search
for convergence that reunifies the different professions and different specialities in
human history. In this connection Simondon invoked Martin Heidegger in his Du
mode d”existence des objets techniques:
In the technicity integrated in the natural world and the human world, these
forms of respect and of disrespect manifest the inherence of values exceeding utility; the thinking that recognizes the nature of the technical reality
is that which, according to the expression of Heidegger, by going beyond
separated objects, utensils, discovers the essence and the capacity of technical organisation, beyond the separated objects and the specialized professions. (Simondon 2012, 303)

14

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

It is not clearly stated where the reference to Heidegger is to be found. However,
we can probably make an allusion to Heidegger’s essay “The Thing” (1971), in
which he proposes the four-fold [das Geviert], namely, heaven, earth, the mortals
and God, to characterize such a convergence in the Thing.7 I reformulate Simondon’s genesis of technicity as a cosmotechnical thinking, and would go beyond
Simondon in adding that this search for convergence should also mediate the modern and the traditional, which in the process of modernisation became strangers to
one another—this was the case in Europe, and it has been much more serious in
China, Japan and other non-European countries over the past two centuries. This
is also the reason why we should study theses reticulations of forces according to
their own philosophical and political histories in order to tackle the problem of
the Anthropocene. However, it would be an illusion to substantialize the ancient
cosmologies against technology, and it will be our task to renew a cosmotechnical
thinking in order to search for a continuity between the modern and the traditional
by appropriating technologies.
Instead of seeing technological development as a rape of nature, Simondon
tends to discover a poeisis in a certain development of technology, which has
both an aesthetic dimension and productive dimension. However, we must point
out that in the thinking of Simondon, reticulation is always given as a form of
cosmo-geographic a priori, and it is the departing point that we can describe as a
techno-geographic milieu of technical ensembles, such as railway networks and
arenas. Commenting on the technical mentality of industrialization, Simondon
proposes that:
It is not a question here of the rape of nature or of the victory of the human Being over the elements, because in fact it is the natural structures
themselves that serve as the attachment point for the network that is being
developed: the relay points of the Hertzian “cables” for example, re-join
with the high sites of ancient sacredness above the valleys and the seas.
(Simondon 2009b, 22)

Simondon analyses the technology-nature relation through a detour of an
antagonism between culture and technics. Technology is not raping nature, as is
often claimed; such perception comes out of a misunderstanding and ignorance
of technology. The aim of Simondon’s thinking is to propose a program through
which culture is able to re-integrate technology by re-connecting nature with technics. In so doing, the antagonism between technology and nature can be resolved.
The question that has to be more systematically studied is that ofhowsuch a desire

On Cosmotechnics

15

and thinking are applicable to modern technologies? This question deserves much
more dedicated analysis. We will only give a glimpse into the sort of possibility Simondon proposed in different contexts. This cosmo-geographic a priori of
reticulation, when it is followed and adopted in the course of technological development, expresses a poiesis of the being-together of the human and nature. The
following example that Simondon gave during a filmed interview with journalist
Jean Le Moyn best illustrates how the cosmo-geographic could be compatible
with the techno-geographic.8
Look at this antenna of television as it is . . . it is rigid but it is oriented; we
see that it looks into the distance, and that it can receive [signals] from an
emitter far away. For me, it appears to be more than a symbol; it seems to
represent a gesture of sorts, an almost magical power of intentionality, a
contemporary form of magic. In this encounter between the highest place
and the nodal point, which is the point of transmission of hyper-frequencies,
there is a sort of “co-naturality” between the human network and the natural
geography of the region. It has a poetic dimension, as well as a dimension
having to do with signification and the encounter between significations.
(Simondon 2009a, 111)

In this quote we can see the unity between the geographical milieu and the technical milieu, in which a cosmopoiesis is presented as a “co-naturality.” The question
is, firstly, where is this cosmo-geographic a priori from? It is not purely universal, since it varies from one culture to another, and conditions different forms of
life; it is transcendental yet, since it is not universal, it also carries an empirical
dimension and is thus subject to renewal. Secondly, what is the sense of the term
“poiesis” as experienced in different cultures? The Greeks’ sense of poetic experience is not necessarily the same as that of the Chinese. Simondon was no anthropologist, although he was a great connoisseur of Greek and Roman culture. He
proposed a general theory of the genesis of technicity which can be supplemented
by current debates in anthropology concerning the role of nature and cosmology.
And cosmologies, when realized as cosmotechnics, will allow us to go beyond the
limits of the technical system that is in the progress of realization, as well as to
see how cosmological thinking can intervene into the imagination of technological
development.

16

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

4. Beyond Nature and Technology
The question that is posed immediately is as follows: Is aesthetics, then, the solution to the problem we have discussed above? It is this question that takes us to
the relation between the cosmo-geographic a priori and the construction of the
techno-geographic milieu, and to the role of cosmotechnical thinking. In order to
investigate this, we will have to look into another example that Simondon gave,
concerning the connection between the technical and the natural milieus, demonstrated by the Guimbal turbine (Simondon 2012, 66–67). With this example,
we also want to push this line of thinking further than Simondon did himself.
The turbines antecedent to the Guimbal turbine suffered from the problem of
over-heating: the turbine produced so much heat that it destroyed itself. Guimbal’s invention consisted of a very important step toward integrating the “natural
world” into the operation of the turbine. The “natural world” is here, for example,
a river. The turbine is well wrapped and isolated with oil, and placed in the river.
The current of the river will drive the turbine to move; at the same time, it also
carries away the heat produced by the turbine. Theoretically, the faster the water,
the larger the amount of heat produced; since the water is fast, heat will dissipate
quickly. In this case, the river becomes part of the operation, though it is not really
a component at the interior of the turbine; rather it is what Simondon calls an
associated milieu (milieu associé) (Simondon 2012, 70). An associated milieu is
defined by a recurrent causality between output and input, in a way that we can
understand as “feedback” in cybernetics.9 However, Simondon also goes beyond
the “feedback” mechanism of cybernetics and considers the formation of the associated milieu within a general technical process of concretization. The associated
milieu is in this case also a techno-geographic milieu. The machine demands an
associated milieu, which is part of a mechanism that allows the machine to resume
its normal working status in the face of both external and internal disturbance.
We may want to consider that here the cosmo-geographic a priori is neither
merely aesthetic, nor being a background, but also operational. It has its signification, not simply as an aesthetic object, but also as a scheme interior to the technical
object, and not simply the function exterior to the object. However, we may want
to problematize this example given by Simondon: in the case of the turbine, and
its integration of the natural world as part of its operation, how about those other
living beings, for example fishes swimming in the river? This is a question that
Simondon (2012) did not touch upon in his On the Mode of Existence of Technical
Objects, and is also outside the scope of the antagonism Simondon sets up at the

On Cosmotechnics

17

beginning of his work: culture vs. technics. As such it may serve as a negative example in Haraway’s (2016) Staying with the Trouble. We will propose that it is for
this reason that we can supplement Simondon’s analysis with current debates in
anthropology, in order to conceive a cosmotechnics confronting the current global
technological exploitation.
The notion of the cosmo-geographic a priori is fundamental to variouscosmotechnics, and the organization of such an a priori varies from one culture to
another. The different “cosmotechnics” can be further analyzed according to their
cultural specificities and understood in terms of different or alternative epistemologies, as well as episteme in the sense of Michel Foucault (1970) namely the
relations between different scientific domains which define the regime of truth. We
mentioned at the beginning of this article that the Anthropocene is often referred
as a gigantic cybernetic system or in line of biologists a complex system, demonstrated by the cover of Stewart Brand’s Whole Earth Catalogue (1968), in which
we see the blue earth from the outside, the earth studied as a whole cybernetic
system, while we have to recognize that this is situated in a specific epistemology,
indicated by the end of the cosmos10 and the beginning of ecology as proposed by
Marshall McLuhan, namely the realization of the cosmos as a gigantic technoscientific object.
Sputnik created a new environment for the planet. For the first time the natural world was completely enclosed in a man-made container. At the moment that the Earth went inside this new artefact, Nature ended and Ecology
was born. ‘Ecological’ thinking became inevitable as soon as the planet
moved up into the status of a work of art. (McLuhan 1974, 49)

At the same time, technological globalization only exports homogeneous technologies embedded within a very narrow and predefined epistemology, and other
cultures are forced to adapt to this technology or else replicate it. We can call this
process modernization. The modernization process driven by economic and military competition has blinded us of seeing the multiplicity of cosmotechnics; rather
it has obliged us to identify all cosmotechnics as part of a universal technological
lineage. It is necessary to approach the question of the Anthropocene interior and
exterior to the technical system that we are confronting, to improve it from within,
and to appropriate it with new epistemes.
The attempt to introduce the concept of cosmotechnics is to explore the limit
of the current concept of technology as well as to re-affirm the relation between
cosmology, morality and technology which has disappeared in the technological

18

Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology

system called the Anthropocene. I hope that with the notion of cosmotechnics
we can re-approach modern technology in two schematic ways. Here I can only
provide some preliminary thoughts. Firstly from interiority, we should question
the epistemology of the techno-scientific applications in order to critically access
it and to develop alternatives. It is clear when we look into established systems of
knowledge such as medicine, which have been kept separated in the process of
modernization, or one is subordinated to the other; for example, Chinese medicine
can only be approved, when it is shown that the ingredients contain the types of
chemicals legitimated in Western medicine. However the question of epistemology is not merely within the domain of science, but rather these epistemologies
are enforced and universalized by capital, and it consequently leads to a naïve
rationalization. Capitalist industrial technologies are efficient because they are
mostly homogeneous and purely calculative. They are homogeneous because they
bypass heterogeneous epistemologies and practices. These industrial technologies
have the tendency to universalize, namely that they can easily go beyond cultural
and national borders, a process known as globalization. However, it is necessary to
critically access these industrial models and demonstrate alternatives.11 A concrete
example that I would like to provide is a project that I led with the computer scientist Harry Halpin to develop an alternative model to platforms such as Facebook.
By tracing the history of social network back to the social psychologist Jacob
Moreno and his invention of sociometrics, we show that such a social network is
based on an individualist concept, namely social atoms, namely each individual
is a social atom and the society is an aggregation of social atoms (Hui and Halpin 2013; cf. Hui 2015). We proposed to develop another model based on groups
instead of individuals, collaboration instead of individual activities. Examples
are surely not limited to social networks (e.g., in this case, the concept of social
relations, individuals, groups, collectives), one should not feel helpless in front
of the becoming-totality of modern technology, but should seek the possibility to
re-appropriate it, like what Gilles Deleuze famously says “there is no need to fear
or hope, but only to look for new weapons” (Deleuze 1992, 5).
Secondly from exteriority, we should conceive the cosmos as an exteriority to
the technological system instead of the anthropocentric view of human activities
as the center of the university, to bear in mind the limit of such a system, beyond
which is the unknown and the mysterious.12 However this is by no means to mystify the cosmos again, or a proposal to go back to the pre-modern cosmology,
but rather to develop new epochal sensibilities which allows us to re-appropriate
modern technology, not only to repurpose it (like what we have mentioned above)

On Cosmotechnics

19

but also to invent cosmotechnics of our epoch. I use sensitivity and cosmotechnics
in plural in order to emphasize that it is not only one sensibility or one cosmotechnics, but rather a re-opening of the question of technology through the affirmation
of non-modern cultures. In order to allow this to take place, every culture will have
to retrieve and formulate its own history of cosmotechnics and only through such
a historical study can new cosmotechnics be revealed to us. The Anthropocene
presents the necessity to reconceive the relation between humans and the Earth/
cosmos, which is reflected in the discussions among anthropologists, Descola’s
ontological pluralism, Viveiros de Castro’s multinaturalism, as well as Latour’s
(2015) Gaia theory. However, this new relation cannot avoid the question of technology since nature is no safe harbor and this is the task that I think philosophy of
technology needs to open up—that is to say, rediscover multiple cosmotechnics
beyond the current discourse of technology, limited as it is to Greek technē and
modern technology coming out of Western modernity, and to develop a theoretical
framework that allows an appropriation of modern technologies as an Ereignis
in the Anthropocene and an overcoming of the oppositions between culture and
nature, and culture and technics.


believe that one can only abandon the notion of first nature as totally innocent and








